Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
Information Processing Techniques Office
University of Southern California
Transmission Control Protocol
This document describes the DoD Standard Transmission Control Protocol
(TCP).  There have been nine earlier editions of the ARPA TCP
specification on which this standard is based, and the present text
draws heavily from them.  There have been many contributors to this work
both in terms of concepts and in terms of text.  This edition clarifies
several details and removes the end-of-letter buffer-size adjustments,
and redescribes the letter mechanism as a push function.
The Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) is intended for use as a highly
reliable host-to-host protocol between hosts in packet-switched computer
communication networks, and in interconnected systems of such networks.
This document describes the functions to be performed by the
Transmission Control Protocol, the program that implements it, and its
interface to programs or users that require its services.
Computer communication systems are playing an increasingly important
role in military, government, and civilian environments.  This
document focuses its attention primarily on military computer
communication requirements, especially robustness in the presence of
communication unreliability and availability in the presence of
congestion, but many of these problems are found in the civilian and
government sector as well.
As strategic and tactical computer communication networks are
developed and deployed, it is essential to provide means of
interconnecting them and to provide standard interprocess
communication protocols which can support a broad range of
applications.  In anticipation of the need for such standards, the
Deputy Undersecretary of Defense for Research and Engineering has
declared the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) described herein to
be a basis for DoD-wide inter-process communication protocol
TCP is a connection-oriented, end-to-end reliable protocol designed to
fit into a layered hierarchy of protocols which support multi-network
applications.  The TCP provides for reliable inter-process
communication between pairs of processes in host computers attached to
distinct but interconnected computer communication networks.  Very few
assumptions are made as to the reliability of the communication
protocols below the TCP layer.  TCP assumes it can obtain a simple,
potentially unreliable datagram service from the lower level
protocols.  In principle, the TCP should be able to operate above a
wide spectrum of communication systems ranging from hard-wired
connections to packet-switched or circuit-switched networks.
TCP is based on concepts first described by Cerf and Kahn in [1].  The
TCP fits into a layered protocol architecture just above a basic
Internet Protocol [2] which provides a way for the TCP to send and
receive variable-length segments of information enclosed in internet
datagram "envelopes".  The internet datagram provides a means for
addressing source and destination TCPs in different networks.  The
internet protocol also deals with any fragmentation or reassembly of
the TCP segments required to achieve transport and delivery through
multiple networks and interconnecting gateways.  The internet protocol
also carries information on the precedence, security classification
and compartmentation of the TCP segments, so this information can be
communicated end-to-end across multiple networks.
Much of this document is written in the context of TCP implementations
which are co-resident with higher level protocols in the host
computer.  Some computer systems will be connected to networks via
front-end computers which house the TCP and internet protocol layers,
as well as network specific software.  The TCP specification describes
an interface to the higher level protocols which appears to be
implementable even for the front-end case, as long as a suitable
host-to-front end protocol is implemented.
The TCP is intended to provide a reliable process-to-process
communication service in a multinetwork environment.  The TCP is
intended to be a host-to-host protocol in common use in multiple
This document represents a specification of the behavior required of
any TCP implementation, both in its interactions with higher level
protocols and in its interactions with other TCPs.  The rest of this
section offers a very brief view of the protocol interfaces and
operation.  Section 2 summarizes the philosophical basis for the TCP
design.  Section 3 offers both a detailed description of the actions
required of TCP when various events occur (arrival of new segments,
user calls, errors, etc.) and the details of the formats of TCP
The TCP interfaces on one side to user or application processes and on
the other side to a lower level protocol such as Internet Protocol.
The interface between an application process and the TCP is
illustrated in reasonable detail.  This interface consists of a set of
calls much like the calls an operating system provides to an
application process for manipulating files.  For example, there are
calls to open and close connections and to send and receive data on
established connections.  It is also expected that the TCP can
asynchronously communicate with application programs.  Although
considerable freedom is permitted to TCP implementors to design
interfaces which are appropriate to a particular operating system
environment, a minimum functionality is required at the TCP/user
interface for any valid implementation.
The interface between TCP and lower level protocol is essentially
unspecified except that it is assumed there is a mechanism whereby the
two levels can asynchronously pass information to each other.
Typically, one expects the lower level protocol to specify this
interface.  TCP is designed to work in a very general environment of
interconnected networks.  The lower level protocol which is assumed
throughout this document is the Internet Protocol [2].
As noted above, the primary purpose of the TCP is to provide reliable,
securable logical circuit or connection service between pairs of
processes.  To provide this service on top of a less reliable internet
communication system requires facilities in the following areas:
Precedence and Security
The basic operation of the TCP in each of these areas is described in
the following paragraphs.
The TCP is able to transfer a continuous stream of octets in each
direction between its users by packaging some number of octets into
segments for transmission through the internet system.  In general,
the TCPs decide when to block and forward data at their own
Sometimes users need to be sure that all the data they have
submitted to the TCP has been transmitted.  For this purpose a push
function is defined.  To assure that data submitted to a TCP is
actually transmitted the sending user indicates that it should be
pushed through to the receiving user.  A push causes the TCPs to
promptly forward and deliver data up to that point to the receiver.
The exact push point might not be visible to the receiving user and
the push function does not supply a record boundary marker.
The TCP must recover from data that is damaged, lost, duplicated, or
delivered out of order by the internet communication system.  This
is achieved by assigning a sequence number to each octet
transmitted, and requiring a positive acknowledgment (ACK) from the
receiving TCP.  If the ACK is not received within a timeout
interval, the data is retransmitted.  At the receiver, the sequence
numbers are used to correctly order segments that may be received
out of order and to eliminate duplicates.  Damage is handled by
adding a checksum to each segment transmitted, checking it at the
receiver, and discarding damaged segments.
As long as the TCPs continue to function properly and the internet
system does not become completely partitioned, no transmission
errors will affect the correct delivery of data.  TCP recovers from
internet communication system errors.
TCP provides a means for the receiver to govern the amount of data
sent by the sender.  This is achieved by returning a "window" with
every ACK indicating a range of acceptable sequence numbers beyond
the last segment successfully received.  The window indicates an
allowed number of octets that the sender may transmit before
receiving further permission.
To allow for many processes within a single Host to use TCP
communication facilities simultaneously, the TCP provides a set of
addresses or ports within each host.  Concatenated with the network
and host addresses from the internet communication layer, this forms
a socket.  A pair of sockets uniquely identifies each connection.
That is, a socket may be simultaneously used in multiple
The binding of ports to processes is handled independently by each
Host.  However, it proves useful to attach frequently used processes
(e.g., a "logger" or timesharing service) to fixed sockets which are
made known to the public.  These services can then be accessed
through the known addresses.  Establishing and learning the port
addresses of other processes may involve more dynamic mechanisms.
The reliability and flow control mechanisms described above require
that TCPs initialize and maintain certain status information for
each data stream.  The combination of this information, including
sockets, sequence numbers, and window sizes, is called a connection.
Each connection is uniquely specified by a pair of sockets
identifying its two sides.
When two processes wish to communicate, their TCP's must first
establish a connection (initialize the status information on each
side).  When their communication is complete, the connection is
terminated or closed to free the resources for other uses.
Since connections must be established between unreliable hosts and
over the unreliable internet communication system, a handshake
mechanism with clock-based sequence numbers is used to avoid
erroneous initialization of connections.
Precedence and Security:
The users of TCP may indicate the security and precedence of their
communication.  Provision is made for default values to be used when
these features are not needed.
The internetwork environment consists of hosts connected to networks
which are in turn interconnected via gateways.  It is assumed here
that the networks may be either local networks (e.g., the ETHERNET) or
large networks (e.g., the ARPANET), but in any case are based on
packet switching technology.  The active agents that produce and
consume messages are processes.  Various levels of protocols in the
networks, the gateways, and the hosts support an interprocess
communication system that provides two-way data flow on logical
connections between process ports.
The term packet is used generically here to mean the data of one
transaction between a host and its network.  The format of data blocks
exchanged within the a network will generally not be of concern to us.
Hosts are computers attached to a network, and from the communication
network's point of view, are the sources and destinations of packets.
Processes are viewed as the active elements in host computers (in
accordance with the fairly common definition of a process as a program
in execution).  Even terminals and files or other I/O devices are
viewed as communicating with each other through the use of processes.
Thus, all communication is viewed as inter-process communication.
Since a process may need to distinguish among several communication
streams between itself and another process (or processes), we imagine
that each process may have a number of ports through which it
communicates with the ports of other processes.
Processes transmit data by calling on the TCP and passing buffers of
data as arguments.  The TCP packages the data from these buffers into
segments and calls on the internet module to transmit each segment to
the destination TCP.  The receiving TCP places the data from a segment
into the receiving user's buffer and notifies the receiving user.  The
TCPs include control information in the segments which they use to
ensure reliable ordered data transmission.
The model of internet communication is that there is an internet
protocol module associated with each TCP which provides an interface
to the local network.  This internet module packages TCP segments
inside internet datagrams and routes these datagrams to a destination
internet module or intermediate gateway.  To transmit the datagram
through the local network, it is embedded in a local network packet.
The packet switches may perform further packaging, fragmentation, or
other operations to achieve the delivery of the local packet to the
destination internet module.
At a gateway between networks, the internet datagram is "unwrapped"
from its local packet and examined to determine through which network
the internet datagram should travel next.  The internet datagram is
then "wrapped" in a local packet suitable to the next network and
routed to the next gateway, or to the final destination.
A gateway is permitted to break up an internet datagram into smaller
internet datagram fragments if this is necessary for transmission
through the next network.  To do this, the gateway produces a set of
internet datagrams; each carrying a fragment.  Fragments may be
further broken into smaller fragments at subsequent gateways.  The
internet datagram fragment format is designed so that the destination
internet module can reassemble fragments into internet datagrams.
A destination internet module unwraps the segment from the datagram
(after reassembling the datagram, if necessary) and passes it to the
This simple model of the operation glosses over many details.  One
important feature is the type of service.  This provides information
to the gateway (or internet module) to guide it in selecting the
service parameters to be used in traversing the next network.
Included in the type of service information is the precedence of the
datagram.  Datagrams may also carry security information to permit
host and gateways that operate in multilevel secure environments to
properly segregate datagrams for security considerations.
The TCP is assumed to be a module in an operating system.  The users
access the TCP much like they would access the file system.  The TCP
may call on other operating system functions, for example, to manage
data structures.  The actual interface to the network is assumed to be
controlled by a device driver module.  The TCP does not call on the
network device driver directly, but rather calls on the internet
datagram protocol module which may in turn call on the device driver.
The mechanisms of TCP do not preclude implementation of the TCP in a
front-end processor.  However, in such an implementation, a
host-to-front-end protocol must provide the functionality to support
the type of TCP-user interface described in this document.
The TCP/user interface provides for calls made by the user on the TCP
to OPEN or CLOSE a connection, to SEND or RECEIVE data, or to obtain
STATUS about a connection.  These calls are like other calls from user
programs on the operating system, for example, the calls to open, read
The TCP/internet interface provides calls to send and receive
datagrams addressed to TCP modules in hosts anywhere in the internet
system.  These calls have parameters for passing the address, type of
service, precedence, security, and other control information.
The following diagram illustrates the place of the TCP in the protocol
It is expected that the TCP will be able to support higher level
protocols efficiently.  It should be easy to interface higher level
protocols like the ARPANET Telnet or AUTODIN II THP to the TCP.
A stream of data sent on a TCP connection is delivered reliably and in
order at the destination.
Transmission is made reliable via the use of sequence numbers and
acknowledgments.  Conceptually, each octet of data is assigned a
sequence number.  The sequence number of the first octet of data in a
segment is transmitted with that segment and is called the segment
sequence number.  Segments also carry an acknowledgment number which
is the sequence number of the next expected data octet of
transmissions in the reverse direction.  When the TCP transmits a
segment containing data, it puts a copy on a retransmission queue and
starts a timer; when the acknowledgment for that data is received, the
segment is deleted from the queue.  If the acknowledgment is not
received before the timer runs out, the segment is retransmitted.
An acknowledgment by TCP does not guarantee that the data has been
delivered to the end user, but only that the receiving TCP has taken
the responsibility to do so.
To govern the flow of data between TCPs, a flow control mechanism is
employed.  The receiving TCP reports a "window" to the sending TCP.
This window specifies the number of octets, starting with the
acknowledgment number, that the receiving TCP is currently prepared to
To identify the separate data streams that a TCP may handle, the TCP
provides a port identifier.  Since port identifiers are selected
independently by each TCP they might not be unique.  To provide for
unique addresses within each TCP, we concatenate an internet address
identifying the TCP with a port identifier to create a socket which
will be unique throughout all networks connected together.
A connection is fully specified by the pair of sockets at the ends.  A
local socket may participate in many connections to different foreign
sockets.  A connection can be used to carry data in both directions,
that is, it is "full duplex".
TCPs are free to associate ports with processes however they choose.
However, several basic concepts are necessary in any implementation.
There must be well-known sockets which the TCP associates only with
the "appropriate" processes by some means.  We envision that processes
may "own" ports, and that processes can initiate connections only on
the ports they own.  (Means for implementing ownership is a local
issue, but we envision a Request Port user command, or a method of
uniquely allocating a group of ports to a given process, e.g., by
associating the high order bits of a port name with a given process.)
A connection is specified in the OPEN call by the local port and
foreign socket arguments.  In return, the TCP supplies a (short) local
connection name by which the user refers to the connection in
subsequent calls.  There are several things that must be remembered
about a connection.  To store this information we imagine that there
is a data structure called a Transmission Control Block (TCB).  One
implementation strategy would have the local connection name be a
pointer to the TCB for this connection.  The OPEN call also specifies
whether the connection establishment is to be actively pursued, or to
be passively waited for.
A passive OPEN request means that the process wants to accept incoming
connection requests rather than attempting to initiate a connection.
Often the process requesting a passive OPEN will accept a connection
request from any caller.  In this case a foreign socket of all zeros
is used to denote an unspecified socket.  Unspecified foreign sockets
are allowed only on passive OPENs.
A service process that wished to provide services for unknown other
processes would issue a passive OPEN request with an unspecified
foreign socket.  Then a connection could be made with any process that
requested a connection to this local socket.  It would help if this
local socket were known to be associated with this service.
Well-known sockets are a convenient mechanism for a priori associating
a socket address with a standard service.  For instance, the
"Telnet-Server" process is permanently assigned to a particular
socket, and other sockets are reserved for File Transfer, Remote Job
Entry, Text Generator, Echoer, and Sink processes (the last three
being for test purposes).  A socket address might be reserved for
access to a "Look-Up" service which would return the specific socket
at which a newly created service would be provided.  The concept of a
well-known socket is part of the TCP specification, but the assignment
of sockets to services is outside this specification.  (See [4].)
Processes can issue passive OPENs and wait for matching active OPENs
from other processes and be informed by the TCP when connections have
been established.  Two processes which issue active OPENs to each
other at the same time will be correctly connected.  This flexibility
is critical for the support of distributed computing in which
components act asynchronously with respect to each other.
There are two principal cases for matching the sockets in the local
passive OPENs and an foreign active OPENs.  In the first case, the
local passive OPENs has fully specified the foreign socket.  In this
case, the match must be exact.  In the second case, the local passive
OPENs has left the foreign socket unspecified.  In this case, any
foreign socket is acceptable as long as the local sockets match.
Other possibilities include partially restricted matches.
If there are several pending passive OPENs (recorded in TCBs) with the
same local socket, an foreign active OPEN will be matched to a TCB
with the specific foreign socket in the foreign active OPEN, if such a
TCB exists, before selecting a TCB with an unspecified foreign socket.
The procedures to establish connections utilize the synchronize (SYN)
control flag and involves an exchange of three messages.  This
exchange has been termed a three-way hand shake [3].
A connection is initiated by the rendezvous of an arriving segment
containing a SYN and a waiting TCB entry each created by a user OPEN
command.  The matching of local and foreign sockets determines when a
connection has been initiated.  The connection becomes "established"
when sequence numbers have been synchronized in both directions.
The clearing of a connection also involves the exchange of segments,
in this case carrying the FIN control flag.
The data that flows on a connection may be thought of as a stream of
octets.  The sending user indicates in each SEND call whether the data
in that call (and any preceeding calls) should be immediately pushed
through to the receiving user by the setting of the PUSH flag.
A sending TCP is allowed to collect data from the sending user and to
send that data in segments at its own convenience, until the push
function is signaled, then it must send all unsent data.  When a
receiving TCP sees the PUSH flag, it must not wait for more data from
the sending TCP before passing the data to the receiving process.
There is no necessary relationship between push functions and segment
boundaries.  The data in any particular segment may be the result of a
single SEND call, in whole or part, or of multiple SEND calls.
The purpose of push function and the PUSH flag is to push data through
from the sending user to the receiving user.  It does not provide a
There is a coupling between the push function and the use of buffers
of data that cross the TCP/user interface.  Each time a PUSH flag is
associated with data placed into the receiving user's buffer, the
buffer is returned to the user for processing even if the buffer is
not filled.  If data arrives that fills the user's buffer before a
PUSH is seen, the data is passed to the user in buffer size units.
TCP also provides a means to communicate to the receiver of data that
at some point further along in the data stream than the receiver is
currently reading there is urgent data.  TCP does not attempt to
define what the user specifically does upon being notified of pending
urgent data, but the general notion is that the receiving process will
take action to process the urgent data quickly.
The TCP makes use of the internet protocol type of service field and
security option to provide precedence and security on a per connection
basis to TCP users.  Not all TCP modules will necessarily function in
a multilevel secure environment; some may be limited to unclassified
use only, and others may operate at only one security level and
compartment.  Consequently, some TCP implementations and services to
users may be limited to a subset of the multilevel secure case.
TCP modules which operate in a multilevel secure environment must
properly mark outgoing segments with the security, compartment, and
precedence.  Such TCP modules must also provide to their users or
higher level protocols such as Telnet or THP an interface to allow
them to specify the desired security level, compartment, and
precedence of connections.
TCP implementations will follow a general principle of robustness:  be
conservative in what you do, be liberal in what you accept from
TCP segments are sent as internet datagrams.  The Internet Protocol
header carries several information fields, including the source and
destination host addresses [2].  A TCP header follows the internet
header, supplying information specific to the TCP protocol.  This
division allows for the existence of host level protocols other than
Note that one tick mark represents one bit position.
The destination port number.
Functional Specification
The sequence number of the first data octet in this segment (except
when SYN is present). If SYN is present the sequence number is the
initial sequence number (ISN) and the first data octet is ISN+1.
Acknowledgment Number:  32 bits
If the ACK control bit is set this field contains the value of the
next sequence number the sender of the segment is expecting to
receive.  Once a connection is established this is always sent.
The number of 32 bit words in the TCP Header.  This indicates where
the data begins.  The TCP header (even one including options) is an
integral number of 32 bits long.
Reserved for future use.  Must be zero.
Control Bits:  6 bits (from left to right):
URG:  Urgent Pointer field significant
ACK:  Acknowledgment field significant
RST:  Reset the connection
SYN:  Synchronize sequence numbers
FIN:  No more data from sender
The number of data octets beginning with the one indicated in the
acknowledgment field which the sender of this segment is willing to
The checksum field is the 16 bit one's complement of the one's
complement sum of all 16 bit words in the header and text.  If a
segment contains an odd number of header and text octets to be
checksummed, the last octet is padded on the right with zeros to
form a 16 bit word for checksum purposes.  The pad is not
transmitted as part of the segment.  While computing the checksum,
the checksum field itself is replaced with zeros.
The checksum also covers a 96 bit pseudo header conceptually
prefixed to the TCP header.  This pseudo header contains the Source
Address, the Destination Address, the Protocol, and TCP length.
This gives the TCP protection against misrouted segments.  This
information is carried in the Internet Protocol and is transferred
across the TCP/Network interface in the arguments or results of
calls by the TCP on the IP.
The TCP Length is the TCP header length plus the data length in
octets (this is not an explicitly transmitted quantity, but is
computed), and it does not count the 12 octets of the pseudo
This field communicates the current value of the urgent pointer as a
positive offset from the sequence number in this segment.  The
urgent pointer points to the sequence number of the octet following
the urgent data.  This field is only be interpreted in segments with
Options may occupy space at the end of the TCP header and are a
multiple of 8 bits in length.  All options are included in the
checksum.  An option may begin on any octet boundary.  There are two
cases for the format of an option:
Case 1:  A single octet of option-kind.
Case 2:  An octet of option-kind, an octet of option-length, and
the actual option-data octets.
The option-length counts the two octets of option-kind and
option-length as well as the option-data octets.
Note that the list of options may be shorter than the data offset
field might imply.  The content of the header beyond the
End-of-Option option must be header padding (i.e., zero).
A TCP must implement all options.
Currently defined options include (kind indicated in octal):
Specific Option Definitions
This option code indicates the end of the option list.  This
might not coincide with the end of the TCP header according to
the Data Offset field.  This is used at the end of all options,
not the end of each option, and need only be used if the end of
the options would not otherwise coincide with the end of the TCP
This option code may be used between options, for example, to
align the beginning of a subsequent option on a word boundary.
There is no guarantee that senders will use this option, so
receivers must be prepared to process options even if they do
not begin on a word boundary.
Maximum Segment Size Option Data:  16 bits
If this option is present, then it communicates the maximum
receive segment size at the TCP which sends this segment.
This field must only be sent in the initial connection request
(i.e., in segments with the SYN control bit set).  If this
option is not used, any segment size is allowed.
The TCP header padding is used to ensure that the TCP header ends
and data begins on a 32 bit boundary.  The padding is composed of
Before we can discuss very much about the operation of the TCP we need
to introduce some detailed terminology.  The maintenance of a TCP
connection requires the remembering of several variables.  We conceive
of these variables being stored in a connection record called a
Transmission Control Block or TCB.  Among the variables stored in the
TCB are the local and remote socket numbers, the security and
precedence of the connection, pointers to the user's send and receive
buffers, pointers to the retransmit queue and to the current segment.
In addition several variables relating to the send and receive
sequence numbers are stored in the TCB.
Send Sequence Variables
SND.UNA - send unacknowledged
SND.UP  - send urgent pointer
SND.WL1 - segment sequence number used for last window update
SND.WL2 - segment acknowledgment number used for last window
ISS     - initial send sequence number
Receive Sequence Variables
RCV.UP  - receive urgent pointer
IRS     - initial receive sequence number
The following diagrams may help to relate some of these variables to
The send window is the portion of the sequence space labeled 3 in
Receive Sequence Space
The receive window is the portion of the sequence space labeled 2 in
There are also some variables used frequently in the discussion that
take their values from the fields of the current segment.
Current Segment Variables
SEG.SEQ - segment sequence number
SEG.ACK - segment acknowledgment number
SEG.UP  - segment urgent pointer
SEG.PRC - segment precedence value
A connection progresses through a series of states during its
lifetime.  The states are:  LISTEN, SYN-SENT, SYN-RECEIVED,
ESTABLISHED, FIN-WAIT-1, FIN-WAIT-2, CLOSE-WAIT, CLOSING, LAST-ACK,
TIME-WAIT, and the fictional state CLOSED.  CLOSED is fictional
because it represents the state when there is no TCB, and therefore,
no connection.  Briefly the meanings of the states are:
LISTEN - represents waiting for a connection request from any remote
SYN-SENT - represents waiting for a matching connection request
after having sent a connection request.
SYN-RECEIVED - represents waiting for a confirming connection
request acknowledgment after having both received and sent a
ESTABLISHED - represents an open connection, data received can be
delivered to the user.  The normal state for the data transfer phase
FIN-WAIT-1 - represents waiting for a connection termination request
from the remote TCP, or an acknowledgment of the connection
termination request previously sent.
FIN-WAIT-2 - represents waiting for a connection termination request
CLOSE-WAIT - represents waiting for a connection termination request
CLOSING - represents waiting for a connection termination request
acknowledgment from the remote TCP.
LAST-ACK - represents waiting for an acknowledgment of the
connection termination request previously sent to the remote TCP
(which includes an acknowledgment of its connection termination
TIME-WAIT - represents waiting for enough time to pass to be sure
the remote TCP received the acknowledgment of its connection
CLOSED - represents no connection state at all.
A TCP connection progresses from one state to another in response to
events.  The events are the user calls, OPEN, SEND, RECEIVE, CLOSE,
ABORT, and STATUS; the incoming segments, particularly those
containing the SYN, ACK, RST and FIN flags; and timeouts.
The state diagram in figure 6 illustrates only state changes, together
with the causing events and resulting actions, but addresses neither
error conditions nor actions which are not connected with state
changes.  In a later section, more detail is offered with respect to
the reaction of the TCP to events.
NOTE BENE:  this diagram is only a summary and must not be taken as
the total specification.
A fundamental notion in the design is that every octet of data sent
over a TCP connection has a sequence number.  Since every octet is
sequenced, each of them can be acknowledged.  The acknowledgment
mechanism employed is cumulative so that an acknowledgment of sequence
number X indicates that all octets up to but not including X have been
received.  This mechanism allows for straight-forward duplicate
detection in the presence of retransmission.  Numbering of octets
within a segment is that the first data octet immediately following
the header is the lowest numbered, and the following octets are
numbered consecutively.
It is essential to remember that the actual sequence number space is
finite, though very large.  This space ranges from 0 to 2**32 - 1.
Since the space is finite, all arithmetic dealing with sequence
numbers must be performed modulo 2**32.  This unsigned arithmetic
preserves the relationship of sequence numbers as they cycle from
2**32 - 1 to 0 again.  There are some subtleties to computer modulo
arithmetic, so great care should be taken in programming the
comparison of such values.  The symbol "=<" means "less than or equal"
The typical kinds of sequence number comparisons which the TCP must
(a)  Determining that an acknowledgment refers to some sequence
number sent but not yet acknowledged.
(b)  Determining that all sequence numbers occupied by a segment
have been acknowledged (e.g., to remove the segment from a
(c)  Determining that an incoming segment contains sequence numbers
which are expected (i.e., that the segment "overlaps" the
In response to sending data the TCP will receive acknowledgments.  The
following comparisons are needed to process the acknowledgments.
SND.UNA = oldest unacknowledged sequence number
SND.NXT = next sequence number to be sent
SEG.ACK = acknowledgment from the receiving TCP (next sequence
number expected by the receiving TCP)
SEG.SEQ = first sequence number of a segment
SEG.LEN = the number of octets occupied by the data in the segment
SEG.SEQ+SEG.LEN-1 = last sequence number of a segment
A new acknowledgment (called an "acceptable ack"), is one for which
the inequality below holds:
A segment on the retransmission queue is fully acknowledged if the sum
of its sequence number and length is less or equal than the
acknowledgment value in the incoming segment.
When data is received the following comparisons are needed:
RCV.NXT = next sequence number expected on an incoming segments, and
is the left or lower edge of the receive window
RCV.NXT+RCV.WND-1 = last sequence number expected on an incoming
segment, and is the right or upper edge of the receive window
SEG.SEQ = first sequence number occupied by the incoming segment
SEG.SEQ+SEG.LEN-1 = last sequence number occupied by the incoming
A segment is judged to occupy a portion of valid receive sequence
RCV.NXT =< SEG.SEQ < RCV.NXT+RCV.WND
RCV.NXT =< SEG.SEQ+SEG.LEN-1 < RCV.NXT+RCV.WND
The first part of this test checks to see if the beginning of the
segment falls in the window, the second part of the test checks to see
if the end of the segment falls in the window; if the segment passes
either part of the test it contains data in the window.
Actually, it is a little more complicated than this.  Due to zero
windows and zero length segments, we have four cases for the
acceptability of an incoming segment:
Note that when the receive window is zero no segments should be
acceptable except ACK segments.  Thus, it is be possible for a TCP to
maintain a zero receive window while transmitting data and receiving
ACKs.  However, even when the receive window is zero, a TCP must
process the RST and URG fields of all incoming segments.
We have taken advantage of the numbering scheme to protect certain
control information as well.  This is achieved by implicitly including
some control flags in the sequence space so they can be retransmitted
and acknowledged without confusion (i.e., one and only one copy of the
control will be acted upon).  Control information is not physically
carried in the segment data space.  Consequently, we must adopt rules
for implicitly assigning sequence numbers to control.  The SYN and FIN
are the only controls requiring this protection, and these controls
are used only at connection opening and closing.  For sequence number
purposes, the SYN is considered to occur before the first actual data
octet of the segment in which it occurs, while the FIN is considered
to occur after the last actual data octet in a segment in which it
occurs.  The segment length (SEG.LEN) includes both data and sequence
space occupying controls.  When a SYN is present then SEG.SEQ is the
sequence number of the SYN.
Initial Sequence Number Selection
The protocol places no restriction on a particular connection being
used over and over again.  A connection is defined by a pair of
sockets.  New instances of a connection will be referred to as
incarnations of the connection.  The problem that arises from this is
-- "how does the TCP identify duplicate segments from previous
incarnations of the connection?"  This problem becomes apparent if the
connection is being opened and closed in quick succession, or if the
connection breaks with loss of memory and is then reestablished.
To avoid confusion we must prevent segments from one incarnation of a
connection from being used while the same sequence numbers may still
be present in the network from an earlier incarnation.  We want to
assure this, even if a TCP crashes and loses all knowledge of the
sequence numbers it has been using.  When new connections are created,
an initial sequence number (ISN) generator is employed which selects a
new 32 bit ISN.  The generator is bound to a (possibly fictitious) 32
bit clock whose low order bit is incremented roughly every 4
microseconds.  Thus, the ISN cycles approximately every 4.55 hours.
Since we assume that segments will stay in the network no more than
the Maximum Segment Lifetime (MSL) and that the MSL is less than 4.55
hours we can reasonably assume that ISN's will be unique.
For each connection there is a send sequence number and a receive
sequence number.  The initial send sequence number (ISS) is chosen by
the data sending TCP, and the initial receive sequence number (IRS) is
learned during the connection establishing procedure.
For a connection to be established or initialized, the two TCPs must
synchronize on each other's initial sequence numbers.  This is done in
an exchange of connection establishing segments carrying a control bit
called "SYN" (for synchronize) and the initial sequence numbers.  As a
shorthand, segments carrying the SYN bit are also called "SYNs".
Hence, the solution requires a suitable mechanism for picking an
initial sequence number and a slightly involved handshake to exchange
The synchronization requires each side to send it's own initial
sequence number and to receive a confirmation of it in acknowledgment
from the other side.  Each side must also receive the other side's
initial sequence number and send a confirming acknowledgment.
1) A --> B  SYN my sequence number is X
2) A <-- B  ACK your sequence number is X
3) A <-- B  SYN my sequence number is Y
4) A --> B  ACK your sequence number is Y
Because steps 2 and 3 can be combined in a single message this is
called the three way (or three message) handshake.
A three way handshake is necessary because sequence numbers are not
tied to a global clock in the network, and TCPs may have different
mechanisms for picking the ISN's.  The receiver of the first SYN has
no way of knowing whether the segment was an old delayed one or not,
unless it remembers the last sequence number used on the connection
(which is not always possible), and so it must ask the sender to
verify this SYN.  The three way handshake and the advantages of a
clock-driven scheme are discussed in [3].
Knowing When to Keep Quiet
To be sure that a TCP does not create a segment that carries a
sequence number which may be duplicated by an old segment remaining in
the network, the TCP must keep quiet for a maximum segment lifetime
(MSL) before assigning any sequence numbers upon starting up or
recovering from a crash in which memory of sequence numbers in use was
lost.  For this specification the MSL is taken to be 2 minutes.  This
is an engineering choice, and may be changed if experience indicates
it is desirable to do so.  Note that if a TCP is reinitialized in some
sense, yet retains its memory of sequence numbers in use, then it need
not wait at all; it must only be sure to use sequence numbers larger
than those recently used.
The TCP Quiet Time Concept
This specification provides that hosts which "crash" without
retaining any knowledge of the last sequence numbers transmitted on
each active (i.e., not closed) connection shall delay emitting any
TCP segments for at least the agreed Maximum Segment Lifetime (MSL)
in the internet system of which the host is a part.  In the
paragraphs below, an explanation for this specification is given.
TCP implementors may violate the "quiet time" restriction, but only
at the risk of causing some old data to be accepted as new or new
data rejected as old duplicated by some receivers in the internet
TCPs consume sequence number space each time a segment is formed and
entered into the network output queue at a source host. The
duplicate detection and sequencing algorithm in the TCP protocol
relies on the unique binding of segment data to sequence space to
the extent that sequence numbers will not cycle through all 2**32
values before the segment data bound to those sequence numbers has
been delivered and acknowledged by the receiver and all duplicate
copies of the segments have "drained" from the internet.  Without
such an assumption, two distinct TCP segments could conceivably be
assigned the same or overlapping sequence numbers, causing confusion
at the receiver as to which data is new and which is old.  Remember
that each segment is bound to as many consecutive sequence numbers
as there are octets of data in the segment.
Under normal conditions, TCPs keep track of the next sequence number
to emit and the oldest awaiting acknowledgment so as to avoid
mistakenly using a sequence number over before its first use has
been acknowledged.  This alone does not guarantee that old duplicate
data is drained from the net, so the sequence space has been made
very large to reduce the probability that a wandering duplicate will
cause trouble upon arrival.  At 2 megabits/sec. it takes 4.5 hours
to use up 2**32 octets of sequence space.  Since the maximum segment
lifetime in the net is not likely to exceed a few tens of seconds,
this is deemed ample protection for foreseeable nets, even if data
rates escalate to l0's of megabits/sec.  At 100 megabits/sec, the
cycle time is 5.4 minutes which may be a little short, but still
The basic duplicate detection and sequencing algorithm in TCP can be
defeated, however, if a source TCP does not have any memory of the
sequence numbers it last used on a given connection. For example, if
the TCP were to start all connections with sequence number 0, then
upon crashing and restarting, a TCP might re-form an earlier
connection (possibly after half-open connection resolution) and emit
packets with sequence numbers identical to or overlapping with
packets still in the network which were emitted on an earlier
incarnation of the same connection.  In the absence of knowledge
about the sequence numbers used on a particular connection, the TCP
specification recommends that the source delay for MSL seconds
before emitting segments on the connection, to allow time for
segments from the earlier connection incarnation to drain from the
Even hosts which can remember the time of day and used it to select
initial sequence number values are not immune from this problem
(i.e., even if time of day is used to select an initial sequence
number for each new connection incarnation).
Suppose, for example, that a connection is opened starting with
sequence number S.  Suppose that this connection is not used much
and that eventually the initial sequence number function (ISN(t))
takes on a value equal to the sequence number, say S1, of the last
segment sent by this TCP on a particular connection.  Now suppose,
at this instant, the host crashes, recovers, and establishes a new
incarnation of the connection. The initial sequence number chosen is
S1 = ISN(t) -- last used sequence number on old incarnation of
connection!  If the recovery occurs quickly enough, any old
duplicates in the net bearing sequence numbers in the neighborhood
of S1 may arrive and be treated as new packets by the receiver of
the new incarnation of the connection.
The problem is that the recovering host may not know for how long it
crashed nor does it know whether there are still old duplicates in
the system from earlier connection incarnations.
One way to deal with this problem is to deliberately delay emitting
segments for one MSL after recovery from a crash- this is the "quite
time" specification.  Hosts which prefer to avoid waiting are
willing to risk possible confusion of old and new packets at a given
destination may choose not to wait for the "quite time".
Implementors may provide TCP users with the ability to select on a
connection by connection basis whether to wait after a crash, or may
informally implement the "quite time" for all connections.
Obviously, even where a user selects to "wait," this is not
necessary after the host has been "up" for at least MSL seconds.
To summarize: every segment emitted occupies one or more sequence
numbers in the sequence space, the numbers occupied by a segment are
"busy" or "in use" until MSL seconds have passed, upon crashing a
block of space-time is occupied by the octets of the last emitted
segment, if a new connection is started too soon and uses any of the
sequence numbers in the space-time footprint of the last segment of
the previous connection incarnation, there is a potential sequence
number overlap area which could cause confusion at the receiver.
The "three-way handshake" is the procedure used to establish a
connection.  This procedure normally is initiated by one TCP and
responded to by another TCP.  The procedure also works if two TCP
simultaneously initiate the procedure.  When simultaneous attempt
occurs, each TCP receives a "SYN" segment which carries no
acknowledgment after it has sent a "SYN".  Of course, the arrival of
an old duplicate "SYN" segment can potentially make it appear, to the
recipient, that a simultaneous connection initiation is in progress.
Proper use of "reset" segments can disambiguate these cases.
Several examples of connection initiation follow.  Although these
examples do not show connection synchronization using data-carrying
segments, this is perfectly legitimate, so long as the receiving TCP
doesn't deliver the data to the user until it is clear the data is
valid (i.e., the data must be buffered at the receiver until the
connection reaches the ESTABLISHED state).  The three-way handshake
reduces the possibility of false connections.  It is the
implementation of a trade-off between memory and messages to provide
information for this checking.
The simplest three-way handshake is shown in figure 7 below.  The
figures should be interpreted in the following way.  Each line is
numbered for reference purposes.  Right arrows (-->) indicate
departure of a TCP segment from TCP A to TCP B, or arrival of a
segment at B from A.  Left arrows (<--), indicate the reverse.
Ellipsis (...) indicates a segment which is still in the network
(delayed).  An "XXX" indicates a segment which is lost or rejected.
Comments appear in parentheses.  TCP states represent the state AFTER
the departure or arrival of the segment (whose contents are shown in
the center of each line).  Segment contents are shown in abbreviated
form, with sequence number, control flags, and ACK field.  Other
fields such as window, addresses, lengths, and text have been left out
in the interest of clarity.
Basic 3-Way Handshake for Connection Synchronization
In line 2 of figure 7, TCP A begins by sending a SYN segment
indicating that it will use sequence numbers starting with sequence
number 100.  In line 3, TCP B sends a SYN and acknowledges the SYN it
received from TCP A.  Note that the acknowledgment field indicates TCP
B is now expecting to hear sequence 101, acknowledging the SYN which
At line 4, TCP A responds with an empty segment containing an ACK for
TCP B's SYN; and in line 5, TCP A sends some data.  Note that the
sequence number of the segment in line 5 is the same as in line 4
because the ACK does not occupy sequence number space (if it did, we
would wind up ACKing ACK's!).
Simultaneous initiation is only slightly more complex, as is shown in
figure 8.  Each TCP cycles from CLOSED to SYN-SENT to SYN-RECEIVED to
Simultaneous Connection Synchronization
The principle reason for the three-way handshake is to prevent old
duplicate connection initiations from causing confusion.  To deal with
this, a special control message, reset, has been devised.  If the
receiving TCP is in a  non-synchronized state (i.e., SYN-SENT,
SYN-RECEIVED), it returns to LISTEN on receiving an acceptable reset.
If the TCP is in one of the synchronized states (ESTABLISHED,
FIN-WAIT-1, FIN-WAIT-2, CLOSE-WAIT, CLOSING, LAST-ACK, TIME-WAIT), it
aborts the connection and informs its user.  We discuss this latter
case under "half-open" connections below.
As a simple example of recovery from old duplicates, consider
figure 9.  At line 3, an old duplicate SYN arrives at TCP B.  TCP B
cannot tell that this is an old duplicate, so it responds normally
(line 4).  TCP A detects that the ACK field is incorrect and returns a
RST (reset) with its SEQ field selected to make the segment
believable.  TCP B, on receiving the RST, returns to the LISTEN state.
When the original SYN (pun intended) finally arrives at line 6, the
synchronization proceeds normally.  If the SYN at line 6 had arrived
before the RST, a more complex exchange might have occurred with RST's
sent in both directions.
Half-Open Connections and Other Anomalies
An established connection is said to be  "half-open" if one of the
TCPs has closed or aborted the connection at its end without the
knowledge of the other, or if the two ends of the connection have
become desynchronized owing to a crash that resulted in loss of
memory.  Such connections will automatically become reset if an
attempt is made to send data in either direction.  However, half-open
connections are expected to be unusual, and the recovery procedure is
If at site A the connection no longer exists, then an attempt by the
user at site B to send any data on it will result in the site B TCP
receiving a reset control message.  Such a message indicates to the
site B TCP that something is wrong, and it is expected to abort the
Assume that two user processes A and B are communicating with one
another when a crash occurs causing loss of memory to A's TCP.
Depending on the operating system supporting A's TCP, it is likely
that some error recovery mechanism exists.  When the TCP is up again,
A is likely to start again from the beginning or from a recovery
point.  As a result, A will probably try to OPEN the connection again
or try to SEND on the connection it believes open.  In the latter
case, it receives the error message "connection not open" from the
local (A's) TCP.  In an attempt to establish the connection, A's TCP
will send a segment containing SYN.  This scenario leads to the
example shown in figure 10.  After TCP A crashes, the user attempts to
re-open the connection.  TCP B, in the meantime, thinks the connection
When the SYN arrives at line 3, TCP B, being in a synchronized state,
and the incoming segment outside the window, responds with an
acknowledgment indicating what sequence it next expects to hear (ACK
100).  TCP A sees that this segment does not acknowledge anything it
sent and, being unsynchronized, sends a reset (RST) because it has
detected a half-open connection.  TCP B aborts at line 5.  TCP A will
continue to try to establish the connection; the problem is now
reduced to the basic 3-way handshake of figure 7.
An interesting alternative case occurs when TCP A crashes and TCP B
tries to send data on what it thinks is a synchronized connection.
This is illustrated in figure 11.  In this case, the data arriving at
TCP A from TCP B (line 2) is unacceptable because no such connection
exists, so TCP A sends a RST.  The RST is acceptable so TCP B
processes it and aborts the connection.
Active Side Causes Half-Open Connection Discovery
In figure 12, we find the two TCPs A and B with passive connections
waiting for SYN.  An old duplicate arriving at TCP B (line 2) stirs B
into action.  A SYN-ACK is returned (line 3) and causes TCP A to
generate a RST (the ACK in line 3 is not acceptable).  TCP B accepts
the reset and returns to its passive LISTEN state.
Old Duplicate SYN Initiates a Reset on two Passive Sockets
A variety of other cases are possible, all of which are accounted for
by the following rules for RST generation and processing.
As a general rule, reset (RST) must be sent whenever a segment arrives
which apparently is not intended for the current connection.  A reset
must not be sent if it is not clear that this is the case.
There are three groups of states:
in response to any incoming segment except another reset.  In
particular, SYNs addressed to a non-existent connection are rejected
If the incoming segment has an ACK field, the reset takes its
sequence number from the ACK field of the segment, otherwise the
reset has sequence number zero and the ACK field is set to the sum
of the sequence number and segment length of the incoming segment.
The connection remains in the CLOSED state.
SYN-SENT, SYN-RECEIVED), and the incoming segment acknowledges
something not yet sent (the segment carries an unacceptable ACK), or
if an incoming segment has a security level or compartment which
does not exactly match the level and compartment requested for the
connection, a reset is sent.
If our SYN has not been acknowledged and the precedence level of the
incoming segment is higher than the precedence level requested then
either raise the local precedence level (if allowed by the user and
the system) or send a reset; or if the precedence level of the
incoming segment is lower than the precedence level requested then
continue as if the precedence matched exactly (if the remote TCP
cannot raise the precedence level to match ours this will be
detected in the next segment it sends, and the connection will be
terminated then).  If our SYN has been acknowledged (perhaps in this
incoming segment) the precedence level of the incoming segment must
match the local precedence level exactly, if it does not a reset
The connection remains in the same state.
FIN-WAIT-1, FIN-WAIT-2, CLOSE-WAIT, CLOSING, LAST-ACK, TIME-WAIT),
any unacceptable segment (out of window sequence number or
unacceptible acknowledgment number) must elicit only an empty
acknowledgment segment containing the current send-sequence number
and an acknowledgment indicating the next sequence number expected
to be received, and the connection remains in the same state.
If an incoming segment has a security level, or compartment, or
precedence which does not exactly match the level, and compartment,
and precedence requested for the connection,a reset is sent and
connection goes to the CLOSED state.  The reset takes its sequence
number from the ACK field of the incoming segment.
In all states except SYN-SENT, all reset (RST) segments are validated
by checking their SEQ-fields.  A reset is valid if its sequence number
is in the window.  In the SYN-SENT state (a RST received in response
to an initial SYN), the RST is acceptable if the ACK field
The receiver of a RST first validates it, then changes state.  If the
receiver was in the LISTEN state, it ignores it.  If the receiver was
in SYN-RECEIVED state and had previously been in the LISTEN state,
then the receiver returns to the LISTEN state, otherwise the receiver
aborts the connection and goes to the CLOSED state.  If the receiver
was in any other state, it aborts the connection and advises the user
and goes to the CLOSED state.
CLOSE is an operation meaning "I have no more data to send."  The
notion of closing a full-duplex connection is subject to ambiguous
interpretation, of course, since it may not be obvious how to treat
the receiving side of the connection.  We have chosen to treat CLOSE
in a simplex fashion.  The user who CLOSEs may continue to RECEIVE
until he is told that the other side has CLOSED also.  Thus, a program
could initiate several SENDs followed by a CLOSE, and then continue to
RECEIVE until signaled that a RECEIVE failed because the other side
has CLOSED.  We assume that the TCP will signal a user, even if no
RECEIVEs are outstanding, that the other side has closed, so the user
can terminate his side gracefully.  A TCP will reliably deliver all
buffers SENT before the connection was CLOSED so a user who expects no
data in return need only wait to hear the connection was CLOSED
successfully to know that all his data was received at the destination
TCP.  Users must keep reading connections they close for sending until
the TCP says no more data.
There are essentially three cases:
1) The user initiates by telling the TCP to CLOSE the connection
2) The remote TCP initiates by sending a FIN control signal
3) Both users CLOSE simultaneously
Case 1:  Local user initiates the close
In this case, a FIN segment can be constructed and placed on the
outgoing segment queue.  No further SENDs from the user will be
accepted by the TCP, and it enters the FIN-WAIT-1 state.  RECEIVEs
are allowed in this state.  All segments preceding and including FIN
will be retransmitted until acknowledged.  When the other TCP has
both acknowledged the FIN and sent a FIN of its own, the first TCP
can ACK this FIN.  Note that a TCP receiving a FIN will ACK but not
send its own FIN until its user has CLOSED the connection also.
Case 2:  TCP receives a FIN from the network
If an unsolicited FIN arrives from the network, the receiving TCP
can ACK it and tell the user that the connection is closing.  The
user will respond with a CLOSE, upon which the TCP can send a FIN to
the other TCP after sending any remaining data.  The TCP then waits
until its own FIN is acknowledged whereupon it deletes the
connection.  If an ACK is not forthcoming, after the user timeout
the connection is aborted and the user is told.
Case 3:  both users close simultaneously
A simultaneous CLOSE by users at both ends of a connection causes
FIN segments to be exchanged.  When all segments preceding the FINs
have been processed and acknowledged, each TCP can ACK the FIN it
has received.  Both will, upon receiving these ACKs, delete the
The intent is that connection be allowed only between ports operating
with exactly the same security and compartment values and at the
higher of the precedence level requested by the two ports.
The precedence and security parameters used in TCP are exactly those
defined in the Internet Protocol (IP) [2].  Throughout this TCP
specification the term "security/compartment" is intended to indicate
the security parameters used in IP including security, compartment,
user group, and handling restriction.
A connection attempt with mismatched security/compartment values or a
lower precedence value must be rejected by sending a reset.  Rejecting
a connection due to too low a precedence only occurs after an
acknowledgment of the SYN has been received.
Note that TCP modules which operate only at the default value of
precedence will still have to check the precedence of incoming
segments and possibly raise the precedence level they use on the
The security paramaters may be used even in a non-secure environment
(the values would indicate unclassified data), thus hosts in
non-secure environments must be prepared to receive the security
parameters, though they need not send them.
Once the connection is established data is communicated by the
exchange of segments.  Because segments may be lost due to errors
(checksum test failure), or network congestion, TCP uses
retransmission (after a timeout) to ensure delivery of every segment.
Duplicate segments may arrive due to network or TCP retransmission.
As discussed in the section on sequence numbers the TCP performs
certain tests on the sequence and acknowledgment numbers in the
segments to verify their acceptability.
The sender of data keeps track of the next sequence number to use in
the variable SND.NXT.  The receiver of data keeps track of the next
sequence number to expect in the variable RCV.NXT.  The sender of data
keeps track of the oldest unacknowledged sequence number in the
variable SND.UNA.  If the data flow is momentarily idle and all data
sent has been acknowledged then the three variables will be equal.
When the sender creates a segment and transmits it the sender advances
SND.NXT.  When the receiver accepts a segment it advances RCV.NXT and
sends an acknowledgment.  When the data sender receives an
acknowledgment it advances SND.UNA.  The extent to which the values of
these variables differ is a measure of the delay in the communication.
The amount by which the variables are advanced is the length of the
data in the segment.  Note that once in the ESTABLISHED state all
segments must carry current acknowledgment information.
The CLOSE user call implies a push function, as does the FIN control
flag in an incoming segment.
Retransmission Timeout
Because of the variability of the networks that compose an
internetwork system and the wide range of uses of TCP connections the
retransmission timeout must be dynamically determined.  One procedure
for determining a retransmission time out is given here as an
An Example Retransmission Timeout Procedure
Measure the elapsed time between sending a data octet with a
particular sequence number and receiving an acknowledgment that
covers that sequence number (segments sent do not have to match
segments received).  This measured elapsed time is the Round Trip
Time (RTT).  Next compute a Smoothed Round Trip Time (SRTT) as:
and based on this, compute the retransmission timeout (RTO) as:
RTO = min[UBOUND,max[LBOUND,(BETA*SRTT)]]
where UBOUND is an upper bound on the timeout (e.g., 1 minute),
LBOUND is a lower bound on the timeout (e.g., 1 second), ALPHA is
a smoothing factor (e.g., .8 to .9), and BETA is a delay variance
The Communication of Urgent Information
The objective of the TCP urgent mechanism is to allow the sending user
to stimulate the receiving user to accept some urgent data and to
permit the receiving TCP to indicate to the receiving user when all
the currently known urgent data has been received by the user.
This mechanism permits a point in the data stream to be designated as
the end of urgent information.  Whenever this point is in advance of
the receive sequence number (RCV.NXT) at the receiving TCP, that TCP
must tell the user to go into "urgent mode"; when the receive sequence
number catches up to the urgent pointer, the TCP must tell user to go
into "normal mode".  If the urgent pointer is updated while the user
is in "urgent mode", the update will be invisible to the user.
The method employs a urgent field which is carried in all segments
transmitted.  The URG control flag indicates that the urgent field is
meaningful and must be added to the segment sequence number to yield
the urgent pointer.  The absence of this flag indicates that there is
no urgent data outstanding.
To send an urgent indication the user must also send at least one data
octet.  If the sending user also indicates a push, timely delivery of
the urgent information to the destination process is enhanced.
The window sent in each segment indicates the range of sequence
numbers the sender of the window (the data receiver) is currently
prepared to accept.  There is an assumption that this is related to
the currently available data buffer space available for this
Indicating a large window encourages transmissions.  If more data
arrives than can be accepted, it will be discarded.  This will result
in excessive retransmissions, adding unnecessarily to the load on the
network and the TCPs.  Indicating a small window may restrict the
transmission of data to the point of introducing a round trip delay
between each new segment transmitted.
The mechanisms provided allow a TCP to advertise a large window and to
subsequently advertise a much smaller window without having accepted
that much data.  This, so called "shrinking the window," is strongly
discouraged.  The robustness principle dictates that TCPs will not
shrink the window themselves, but will be prepared for such behavior
on the part of other TCPs.
The sending TCP must be prepared to accept from the user and send at
least one octet of new data even if the send window is zero.  The
sending TCP must regularly retransmit to the receiving TCP even when
the window is zero.  Two minutes is recommended for the retransmission
interval when the window is zero.  This retransmission is essential to
guarantee that when either TCP has a zero window the re-opening of the
window will be reliably reported to the other.
When the receiving TCP has a zero window and a segment arrives it must
still send an acknowledgment showing its next expected sequence number
and current window (zero).
The sending TCP packages the data to be transmitted into segments
which fit the current window, and may repackage segments on the
retransmission queue.  Such repackaging is not required, but may be
In a connection with a one-way data flow, the window information will
be carried in acknowledgment segments that all have the same sequence
number so there will be no way to reorder them if they arrive out of
order.  This is not a serious problem, but it will allow the window
information to be on occasion temporarily based on old reports from
the data receiver.  A refinement to avoid this problem is to act on
the window information from segments that carry the highest
acknowledgment number (that is segments with acknowledgment number
equal or greater than the highest previously received).
The window management procedure has significant influence on the
communication performance.  The following comments are suggestions to
Window Management Suggestions
Allocating a very small window causes data to be transmitted in
many small segments when better performance is achieved using
One suggestion for avoiding small windows is for the receiver to
defer updating a window until the additional allocation is at
least X percent of the maximum allocation possible for the
connection (where X might be 20 to 40).
Another suggestion is for the sender to avoid sending small
segments by waiting until the window is large enough before
sending data.  If the the user signals a push function then the
data must be sent even if it is a small segment.
Note that the acknowledgments should not be delayed or unnecessary
retransmissions will result.  One strategy would be to send an
acknowledgment when a small segment arrives (with out updating the
window information), and then to send another acknowledgment with
new window information when the window is larger.
The segment sent to probe a zero window may also begin a break up
of transmitted data into smaller and smaller segments.  If a
segment containing a single data octet sent to probe a zero window
is accepted, it consumes one octet of the window now available.
If the sending TCP simply sends as much as it can whenever the
window is non zero, the transmitted data will be broken into
alternating big and small segments.  As time goes on, occasional
pauses in the receiver making window allocation available will
result in breaking the big segments into a small and not quite so
big pair. And after a while the data transmission will be in
The suggestion here is that the TCP implementations need to
actively attempt to combine small window allocations into larger
windows, since the mechanisms for managing the window tend to lead
to many small windows in the simplest minded implementations.
There are of course two interfaces of concern:  the user/TCP interface
and the TCP/lower-level interface.  We have a fairly elaborate model
of the user/TCP interface, but the interface to the lower level
protocol module is left unspecified here, since it will be specified
in detail by the specification of the lowel level protocol.  For the
case that the lower level is IP we note some of the parameter values
The following functional description of user commands to the TCP is,
at best, fictional, since every operating system will have different
facilities.  Consequently, we must warn readers that different TCP
implementations may have different user interfaces.  However, all
TCPs must provide a certain minimum set of services to guarantee
that all TCP implementations can support the same protocol
hierarchy.  This section specifies the functional interfaces
required of all TCP implementations.
The following sections functionally characterize a USER/TCP
interface.  The notation used is similar to most procedure or
function calls in high level languages, but this usage is not
meant to rule out trap type service calls (e.g., SVCs, UUOs,
The user commands described below specify the basic functions the
TCP must perform to support interprocess communication.
Individual implementations must define their own exact format, and
may provide combinations or subsets of the basic functions in
single calls.  In particular, some implementations may wish to
automatically OPEN a connection on the first SEND or RECEIVE
issued by the user for a given connection.
In providing interprocess communication facilities, the TCP must
not only accept commands, but must also return information to the
processes it serves.  The latter consists of:
(a) general information about a connection (e.g., interrupts,
remote close, binding of unspecified foreign socket).
(b) replies to specific user commands indicating success or
various types of failure.
Format:  OPEN (local port, foreign socket, active/passive
[, timeout] [, precedence] [, security/compartment] [, options])
We assume that the local TCP is aware of the identity of the
processes it serves and will check the authority of the process
to use the connection specified.  Depending upon the
implementation of the TCP, the local network and TCP identifiers
for the source address will either be supplied by the TCP or the
lower level protocol (e.g., IP).  These considerations are the
result of concern about security, to the extent that no TCP be
able to masquerade as another one, and so on.  Similarly, no
process can masquerade as another without the collusion of the
If the active/passive flag is set to passive, then this is a
call to LISTEN for an incoming connection.  A passive open may
have either a fully specified foreign socket to wait for a
particular connection or an unspecified foreign socket to wait
for any call.  A fully specified passive call can be made active
by the subsequent execution of a SEND.
A transmission control block (TCB) is created and partially
filled in with data from the OPEN command parameters.
On an active OPEN command, the TCP will begin the procedure to
synchronize (i.e., establish) the connection at once.
The timeout, if present, permits the caller to set up a timeout
for all data submitted to TCP.  If data is not successfully
delivered to the destination within the timeout period, the TCP
will abort the connection.  The present global default is five
The TCP or some component of the operating system will verify
the users authority to open a connection with the specified
precedence or security/compartment.  The absence of precedence
or security/compartment specification in the OPEN call indicates
the default values must be used.
TCP will accept incoming requests as matching only if the
security/compartment information is exactly the same and only if
the precedence is equal to or higher than the precedence
requested in the OPEN call.
The precedence for the connection is the higher of the values
requested in the OPEN call and received from the incoming
request, and fixed at that value for the life of the
connection.Implementers may want to give the user control of
this precedence negotiation.  For example, the user might be
allowed to specify that the precedence must be exactly matched,
or that any attempt to raise the precedence be confirmed by the
A local connection name will be returned to the user by the TCP.
The local connection name can then be used as a short hand term
for the connection defined by the <local socket, foreign socket>
Format:  SEND (local connection name, buffer address, byte
count, PUSH flag, URGENT flag [,timeout])
This call causes the data contained in the indicated user buffer
to be sent on the indicated connection.  If the connection has
not been opened, the SEND is considered an error.  Some
implementations may allow users to SEND first; in which case, an
automatic OPEN would be done.  If the calling process is not
authorized to use this connection, an error is returned.
If the PUSH flag is set, the data must be transmitted promptly
to the receiver, and the PUSH bit will be set in the last TCP
segment created from the buffer.  If the PUSH flag is not set,
the data may be combined with data from subsequent SENDs for
transmission efficiency.
If the URGENT flag is set, segments sent to the destination TCP
will have the urgent pointer set.  The receiving TCP will signal
the urgent condition to the receiving process if the urgent
pointer indicates that data preceding the urgent pointer has not
been consumed by the receiving process.  The purpose of urgent
is to stimulate the receiver to process the urgent data and to
indicate to the receiver when all the currently known urgent
data has been received.  The number of times the sending user's
TCP signals urgent will not necessarily be equal to the number
of times the receiving user will be notified of the presence of
If no foreign socket was specified in the OPEN, but the
connection is established (e.g., because a LISTENing connection
has become specific due to a foreign segment arriving for the
local socket), then the designated buffer is sent to the implied
foreign socket.  Users who make use of OPEN with an unspecified
foreign socket can make use of SEND without ever explicitly
knowing the foreign socket address.
However, if a SEND is attempted before the foreign socket
becomes specified, an error will be returned.  Users can use the
STATUS call to determine the status of the connection.  In some
implementations the TCP may notify the user when an unspecified
If a timeout is specified, the current user timeout for this
connection is changed to the new one.
In the simplest implementation, SEND would not return control to
the sending process until either the transmission was complete
or the timeout had been exceeded.  However, this simple method
is both subject to deadlocks (for example, both sides of the
connection might try to do SENDs before doing any RECEIVEs) and
offers poor performance, so it is not recommended.  A more
sophisticated implementation would return immediately to allow
the process to run concurrently with network I/O, and,
furthermore, to allow multiple SENDs to be in progress.
Multiple SENDs are served in first come, first served order, so
the TCP will queue those it cannot service immediately.
We have implicitly assumed an asynchronous user interface in
which a SEND later elicits some kind of SIGNAL or
pseudo-interrupt from the serving TCP.  An alternative is to
return a response immediately.  For instance, SENDs might return
immediate local acknowledgment, even if the segment sent had not
been acknowledged by the distant TCP.  We could optimistically
assume eventual success.  If we are wrong, the connection will
close anyway due to the timeout.  In implementations of this
kind (synchronous), there will still be some asynchronous
signals, but these will deal with the connection itself, and not
with specific segments or buffers.
In order for the process to distinguish among error or success
indications for different SENDs, it might be appropriate for the
buffer address to be returned along with the coded response to
the SEND request.  TCP-to-user signals are discussed below,
indicating the information which should be returned to the
Format:  RECEIVE (local connection name, buffer address, byte
count) -> byte count, urgent flag, push flag
This command allocates a receiving buffer associated with the
specified connection.  If no OPEN precedes this command or the
calling process is not authorized to use this connection, an
In the simplest implementation, control would not return to the
calling program until either the buffer was filled, or some
error occurred, but this scheme is highly subject to deadlocks.
A more sophisticated implementation would permit several
RECEIVEs to be outstanding at once.  These would be filled as
segments arrive.  This strategy permits increased throughput at
the cost of a more elaborate scheme (possibly asynchronous) to
notify the calling program that a PUSH has been seen or a buffer
If enough data arrive to fill the buffer before a PUSH is seen,
the PUSH flag will not be set in the response to the RECEIVE.
The buffer will be filled with as much data as it can hold.  If
a PUSH is seen before the buffer is filled the buffer will be
returned partially filled and PUSH indicated.
If there is urgent data the user will have been informed as soon
as it arrived via a TCP-to-user signal.  The receiving user
should thus be in "urgent mode".  If the URGENT flag is on,
additional urgent data remains.  If the URGENT flag is off, this
call to RECEIVE has returned all the urgent data, and the user
may now leave "urgent mode".  Note that data following the
urgent pointer (non-urgent data) cannot be delivered to the user
in the same buffer with preceeding urgent data unless the
boundary is clearly marked for the user.
To distinguish among several outstanding RECEIVEs and to take
care of the case that a buffer is not completely filled, the
return code is accompanied by both a buffer pointer and a byte
count indicating the actual length of the data received.
Alternative implementations of RECEIVE might have the TCP
allocate buffer storage, or the TCP might share a ring buffer
Format:  CLOSE (local connection name)
This command causes the connection specified to be closed.  If
the connection is not open or the calling process is not
Closing connections is intended to be a graceful operation in
the sense that outstanding SENDs will be transmitted (and
retransmitted), as flow control permits, until all have been
serviced.  Thus, it should be acceptable to make several SEND
calls, followed by a CLOSE, and expect all the data to be sent
to the destination.  It should also be clear that users should
continue to RECEIVE on CLOSING connections, since the other side
may be trying to transmit the last of its data.  Thus, CLOSE
means "I have no more to send" but does not mean "I will not
receive any more."  It may happen (if the user level protocol is
not well thought out) that the closing side is unable to get rid
of all its data before timing out.  In this event, CLOSE turns
into ABORT, and the closing TCP gives up.
The user may CLOSE the connection at any time on his own
initiative, or in response to various prompts from the TCP
(e.g., remote close executed, transmission timeout exceeded,
destination inaccessible).
Because closing a connection requires communication with the
foreign TCP, connections may remain in the closing state for a
short time.  Attempts to reopen the connection before the TCP
replies to the CLOSE command will result in error responses.
Close also implies push function.
Format:  STATUS (local connection name) -> status data
This is an implementation dependent user command and could be
excluded without adverse effect.  Information returned would
typically come from the TCB associated with the connection.
This command returns a data block containing the following
number of buffers awaiting acknowledgment,
number of buffers pending receipt,
and transmission timeout.
Depending on the state of the connection, or on the
implementation itself, some of this information may not be
available or meaningful.  If the calling process is not
authorized to use this connection, an error is returned.  This
prevents unauthorized processes from gaining information about a
Format:  ABORT (local connection name)
This command causes all pending SENDs and RECEIVES to be
aborted, the TCB to be removed, and a special RESET message to
be sent to the TCP on the other side of the connection.
Depending on the implementation, users may receive abort
indications for each outstanding SEND or RECEIVE, or may simply
receive an ABORT-acknowledgment.
It is assumed that the operating system environment provides a
means for the TCP to asynchronously signal the user program.  When
the TCP does signal a user program, certain information is passed
to the user.  Often in the specification the information will be
an error message.  In other cases there will be information
relating to the completion of processing a SEND or RECEIVE or
The following information is provided:
Byte count (counts bytes received)       Receive
TCP/Lower-Level Interface
The TCP calls on a lower level protocol module to actually send and
receive information over a network.  One case is that of the ARPA
internetwork system where the lower level module is the Internet
If the lower level protocol is IP it provides arguments for a type
of service and for a time to live.  TCP uses the following settings
Type of Service = Precedence: routine, Delay: normal, Throughput:
Note that the assumed maximum segment lifetime is two minutes.
Here we explicitly ask that a segment be destroyed if it cannot
be delivered by the internet system within one minute.
If the lower level is IP (or other protocol that provides this
feature) and source routing is used, the interface must allow the
route information to be communicated.  This is especially important
so that the source and destination addresses used in the TCP
checksum be the originating source and ultimate destination. It is
also important to preserve the return route to answer connection
Any lower level protocol will have to provide the source address,
destination address, and protocol fields, and some way to determine
the "TCP length", both to provide the functional equivlent service
of IP and to be used in the TCP checksum.
The processing depicted in this section is an example of one possible
implementation.  Other implementations may have slightly different
processing sequences, but they should differ from those in this
section only in detail, not in substance.
The activity of the TCP can be characterized as responding to events.
The events that occur can be cast into three categories:  user calls,
arriving segments, and timeouts.  This section describes the
processing the TCP does in response to each of the events.  In many
cases the processing required depends on the state of the connection.
RETRANSMISSION TIMEOUT
The model of the TCP/user interface is that user commands receive an
immediate return and possibly a delayed response via an event or
pseudo interrupt.  In the following descriptions, the term "signal"
means cause a delayed response.
Error responses are given as character strings.  For example, user
commands referencing connections that do not exist receive "error:
Please note in the following that all arithmetic on sequence numbers,
acknowledgment numbers, windows, et cetera, is modulo 2**32 the size
of the sequence number space.  Also note that "=<" means less than or
A natural way to think about processing incoming segments is to
imagine that they are first tested for proper sequence number (i.e.,
that their contents lie in the range of the expected "receive window"
in the sequence number space) and then that they are generally queued
and processed in sequence number order.
When a segment overlaps other already received segments we reconstruct
the segment to contain just the new data, and adjust the header fields
Note that if no state change is mentioned the TCP stays in the same
CLOSED STATE (i.e., TCB does not exist)
Create a new transmission control block (TCB) to hold connection
state information.  Fill in local socket identifier, foreign
socket, precedence, security/compartment, and user timeout
information.  Note that some parts of the foreign socket may be
unspecified in a passive OPEN and are to be filled in by the
parameters of the incoming SYN segment.  Verify the security and
precedence requested are allowed for this user, if not return
"error:  precedence not allowed" or "error:  security/compartment
not allowed."  If passive enter the LISTEN state and return.  If
active and the foreign socket is unspecified, return "error:
foreign socket unspecified"; if active and the foreign socket is
specified, issue a SYN segment.  An initial send sequence number
(ISS) is selected.  A SYN segment of the form <SEQ=ISS><CTL=SYN>
is sent.  Set SND.UNA to ISS, SND.NXT to ISS+1, enter SYN-SENT
If the caller does not have access to the local socket specified,
return "error:  connection illegal for this process".  If there is
no room to create a new connection, return "error:  insufficient
If active and the foreign socket is specified, then change the
connection from passive to active, select an ISS.  Send a SYN
segment, set SND.UNA to ISS, SND.NXT to ISS+1.  Enter SYN-SENT
state.  Data associated with SEND may be sent with SYN segment or
queued for transmission after entering ESTABLISHED state.  The
urgent bit if requested in the command must be sent with the data
segments sent as a result of this command.  If there is no room to
queue the request, respond with "error:  insufficient resources".
If Foreign socket was not specified, then return "error:  foreign
Return "error:  connection already exists".
If the user does not have access to such a connection, then return
"error:  connection illegal for this process".
Otherwise, return "error:  connection does not exist".
If the foreign socket is specified, then change the connection
from passive to active, select an ISS.  Send a SYN segment, set
SND.UNA to ISS, SND.NXT to ISS+1.  Enter SYN-SENT state.  Data
associated with SEND may be sent with SYN segment or queued for
transmission after entering ESTABLISHED state.  The urgent bit if
requested in the command must be sent with the data segments sent
as a result of this command.  If there is no room to queue the
request, respond with "error:  insufficient resources".  If
Foreign socket was not specified, then return "error:  foreign
Queue the data for transmission after entering ESTABLISHED state.
If no space to queue, respond with "error:  insufficient
Segmentize the buffer and send it with a piggybacked
acknowledgment (acknowledgment value = RCV.NXT).  If there is
insufficient space to remember this buffer, simply return "error:
insufficient resources".
If the urgent flag is set, then SND.UP <- SND.NXT-1 and set the
urgent pointer in the outgoing segments.
Return "error:  connection closing" and do not service request.
If the user does not have access to such a connection, return
Otherwise return "error:  connection does not exist".
Queue for processing after entering ESTABLISHED state.  If there
is no room to queue this request, respond with "error:
If insufficient incoming segments are queued to satisfy the
request, queue the request.  If there is no queue space to
remember the RECEIVE, respond with "error:  insufficient
Reassemble queued incoming segments into receive buffer and return
to user.  Mark "push seen" (PUSH) if this is the case.
If RCV.UP is in advance of the data currently being passed to the
user notify the user of the presence of urgent data.
When the TCP takes responsibility for delivering data to the user
that fact must be communicated to the sender via an
acknowledgment.  The formation of such an acknowledgment is
described below in the discussion of processing an incoming
Since the remote side has already sent FIN, RECEIVEs must be
satisfied by text already on hand, but not yet delivered to the
user.  If no text is awaiting delivery, the RECEIVE will get a
"error:  connection closing" response.  Otherwise, any remaining
text can be used to satisfy the RECEIVE.
Return "error:  connection closing".
Any outstanding RECEIVEs are returned with "error:  closing"
responses.  Delete TCB, enter CLOSED state, and return.
Delete the TCB and return "error:  closing" responses to any
queued SENDs, or RECEIVEs.
If no SENDs have been issued and there is no pending data to send,
then form a FIN segment and send it, and enter FIN-WAIT-1 state;
otherwise queue for processing after entering ESTABLISHED state.
Queue this until all preceding SENDs have been segmentized, then
form a FIN segment and send it.  In any case, enter FIN-WAIT-1
Strictly speaking, this is an error and should receive a "error:
connection closing" response.  An "ok" response would be
acceptable, too, as long as a second FIN is not emitted (the first
FIN may be retransmitted though).
Queue this request until all preceding SENDs have been
segmentized; then send a FIN segment, enter CLOSING state.
Respond with "error:  connection closing".
If the user should not have access to such a connection, return
Any outstanding RECEIVEs should be returned with "error:
connection reset" responses.  Delete TCB, enter CLOSED state, and
All queued SENDs and RECEIVEs should be given "connection reset"
notification, delete the TCB, enter CLOSED state, and return.
notification; all segments queued for transmission (except for the
RST formed above) or retransmission should be flushed, delete the
TCB, enter CLOSED state, and return.
Respond with "ok" and delete the TCB, enter CLOSED state, and
Return "state = LISTEN", and the TCB pointer.
Return "state = SYN-SENT", and the TCB pointer.
Return "state = SYN-RECEIVED", and the TCB pointer.
Return "state = ESTABLISHED", and the TCB pointer.
Return "state = FIN-WAIT-1", and the TCB pointer.
Return "state = FIN-WAIT-2", and the TCB pointer.
Return "state = CLOSE-WAIT", and the TCB pointer.
Return "state = CLOSING", and the TCB pointer.
Return "state = LAST-ACK", and the TCB pointer.
Return "state = TIME-WAIT", and the TCB pointer.
If the state is CLOSED (i.e., TCB does not exist) then
all data in the incoming segment is discarded.  An incoming
segment containing a RST is discarded.  An incoming segment not
containing a RST causes a RST to be sent in response.  The
acknowledgment and sequence field values are selected to make the
reset sequence acceptable to the TCP that sent the offending
If the ACK bit is off, sequence number zero is used,
<SEQ=0><ACK=SEG.SEQ+SEG.LEN><CTL=RST,ACK>
If the state is LISTEN then
An incoming RST should be ignored.  Return.
Any acknowledgment is bad if it arrives on a connection still in
the LISTEN state.  An acceptable reset segment should be formed
for any arriving ACK-bearing segment.  The RST should be
If the SYN bit is set, check the security.  If the
security/compartment on the incoming segment does not exactly
match the security/compartment in the TCB then send a reset and
If the SEG.PRC is greater than the TCB.PRC then if allowed by
the user and the system set TCB.PRC<-SEG.PRC, if not allowed
If the SEG.PRC is less than the TCB.PRC then continue.
Set RCV.NXT to SEG.SEQ+1, IRS is set to SEG.SEQ and any other
control or text should be queued for processing later.  ISS
should be selected and a SYN segment sent of the form:
SND.NXT is set to ISS+1 and SND.UNA to ISS.  The connection
state should be changed to SYN-RECEIVED.  Note that any other
incoming control or data (combined with SYN) will be processed
in the SYN-RECEIVED state, but processing of SYN and ACK should
not be repeated.  If the listen was not fully specified (i.e.,
the foreign socket was not fully specified), then the
unspecified fields should be filled in now.
fourth other text or control
Any other control or text-bearing segment (not containing SYN)
must have an ACK and thus would be discarded by the ACK
processing.  An incoming RST segment could not be valid, since
it could not have been sent in response to anything sent by this
incarnation of the connection.  So you are unlikely to get here,
but if you do, drop the segment, and return.
If the state is SYN-SENT then
If SEG.ACK =< ISS, or SEG.ACK > SND.NXT, send a reset (unless
the RST bit is set, if so drop the segment and return)
and discard the segment.  Return.
If SND.UNA =< SEG.ACK =< SND.NXT then the ACK is acceptable.
second check the RST bit
If the ACK was acceptable then signal the user "error:
connection reset", drop the segment, enter CLOSED state,
delete TCB, and return.  Otherwise (no ACK) drop the segment
third check the security and precedence
If the security/compartment in the segment does not exactly
match the security/compartment in the TCB, send a reset
The precedence in the segment must match the precedence in the
If the precedence in the segment is higher than the precedence
in the TCB then if allowed by the user and the system raise
the precedence in the TCB to that in the segment, if not
allowed to raise the prec then send a reset.
If the precedence in the segment is lower than the precedence
If a reset was sent, discard the segment and return.
fourth check the SYN bit
This step should be reached only if the ACK is ok, or there is
no ACK, and it the segment did not contain a RST.
If the SYN bit is on and the security/compartment and precedence
are acceptable then, RCV.NXT is set to SEG.SEQ+1, IRS is set to
SEG.SEQ.  SND.UNA should be advanced to equal SEG.ACK (if there
is an ACK), and any segments on the retransmission queue which
are thereby acknowledged should be removed.
If SND.UNA > ISS (our SYN has been ACKed), change the connection
state to ESTABLISHED, form an ACK segment
and send it.  Data or controls which were queued for
transmission may be included.  If there are other controls or
text in the segment then continue processing at the sixth step
below where the URG bit is checked, otherwise return.
Otherwise enter SYN-RECEIVED, form a SYN,ACK segment
and send it.  If there are other controls or text in the
segment, queue them for processing after the ESTABLISHED state
has been reached, return.
fifth, if neither of the SYN or RST bits is set then drop the
first check sequence number
Segments are processed in sequence.  Initial tests on arrival
are used to discard old duplicates, but further processing is
done in SEG.SEQ order.  If a segment's contents straddle the
boundary between old and new, only the new parts should be
There are four cases for the acceptability test for an incoming
If the RCV.WND is zero, no segments will be acceptable, but
special allowance should be made to accept valid ACKs, URGs and
If an incoming segment is not acceptable, an acknowledgment
should be sent in reply (unless the RST bit is set, if so drop
After sending the acknowledgment, drop the unacceptable segment
In the following it is assumed that the segment is the idealized
segment that begins at RCV.NXT and does not exceed the window.
One could tailor actual segments to fit this assumption by
trimming off any portions that lie outside the window (including
SYN and FIN), and only processing further if the segment then
begins at RCV.NXT.  Segments with higher begining sequence
numbers may be held for later processing.
second check the RST bit,
If this connection was initiated with a passive OPEN (i.e.,
came from the LISTEN state), then return this connection to
LISTEN state and return.  The user need not be informed.  If
this connection was initiated with an active OPEN (i.e., came
from SYN-SENT state) then the connection was refused, signal
the user "connection refused".  In either case, all segments
on the retransmission queue should be removed.  And in the
active OPEN case, enter the CLOSED state and delete the TCB,
If the RST bit is set then, any outstanding RECEIVEs and SEND
should receive "reset" responses.  All segment queues should be
flushed.  Users should also receive an unsolicited general
"connection reset" signal.  Enter the CLOSED state, delete the
If the RST bit is set then, enter the CLOSED state, delete the
third check security and precedence
If the security/compartment and precedence in the segment do not
exactly match the security/compartment and precedence in the TCB
then send a reset, and return.
then send a reset, any outstanding RECEIVEs and SEND should
receive "reset" responses.  All segment queues should be
Note this check is placed following the sequence check to prevent
a segment from an old connection between these ports with a
different security or precedence from causing an abort of the
fourth, check the SYN bit,
If the SYN is in the window it is an error, send a reset, any
outstanding RECEIVEs and SEND should receive "reset" responses,
all segment queues should be flushed, the user should also
receive an unsolicited general "connection reset" signal, enter
the CLOSED state, delete the TCB, and return.
If the SYN is not in the window this step would not be reached
and an ack would have been sent in the first step (sequence
fifth check the ACK field,
if the ACK bit is off drop the segment and return
If SND.UNA =< SEG.ACK =< SND.NXT then enter ESTABLISHED state
and continue processing.
If the segment acknowledgment is not acceptable, form a
Any segments on the retransmission queue which are thereby
entirely acknowledged are removed.  Users should receive
positive acknowledgments for buffers which have been SENT and
fully acknowledged (i.e., SEND buffer should be returned with
"ok" response).  If the ACK is a duplicate
(SEG.ACK < SND.UNA), it can be ignored.  If the ACK acks
something not yet sent (SEG.ACK > SND.NXT) then send an ACK,
drop the segment, and return.
If SND.UNA < SEG.ACK =< SND.NXT, the send window should be
Note that SND.WND is an offset from SND.UNA, that SND.WL1
records the sequence number of the last segment used to update
SND.WND, and that SND.WL2 records the acknowledgment number of
the last segment used to update SND.WND.  The check here
prevents using old segments to update the window.
In addition to the processing for the ESTABLISHED state, if
our FIN is now acknowledged then enter FIN-WAIT-2 and continue
processing in that state.
the retransmission queue is empty, the user's CLOSE can be
acknowledged ("ok") but do not delete the TCB.
Do the same processing as for the ESTABLISHED state.
the ACK acknowledges our FIN then enter the TIME-WAIT state,
otherwise ignore the segment.
The only thing that can arrive in this state is an
acknowledgment of our FIN.  If our FIN is now acknowledged,
delete the TCB, enter the CLOSED state, and return.
The only thing that can arrive in this state is a
retransmission of the remote FIN.  Acknowledge it, and restart
If the URG bit is set, RCV.UP <- max(RCV.UP,SEG.UP), and signal
the user that the remote side has urgent data if the urgent
pointer (RCV.UP) is in advance of the data consumed.  If the
user has already been signaled (or is still in the "urgent
mode") for this continuous sequence of urgent data, do not
This should not occur, since a FIN has been received from the
remote side.  Ignore the URG.
seventh, process the segment text,
Once in the ESTABLISHED state, it is possible to deliver segment
text to user RECEIVE buffers.  Text from segments can be moved
into buffers until either the buffer is full or the segment is
empty.  If the segment empties and carries an PUSH flag, then
the user is informed, when the buffer is returned, that a PUSH
When the TCP takes responsibility for delivering the data to the
user it must also acknowledge the receipt of the data.
Once the TCP takes responsibility for the data it advances
RCV.NXT over the data accepted, and adjusts RCV.WND as
apporopriate to the current buffer availability.  The total of
RCV.NXT and RCV.WND should not be reduced.
Please note the window management suggestions in section 3.7.
Send an acknowledgment of the form:
This acknowledgment should be piggybacked on a segment being
transmitted if possible without incurring undue delay.
remote side.  Ignore the segment text.
eighth, check the FIN bit,
Do not process the FIN if the state is CLOSED, LISTEN or SYN-SENT
since the SEG.SEQ cannot be validated; drop the segment and
If the FIN bit is set, signal the user "connection closing" and
return any pending RECEIVEs with same message, advance RCV.NXT
over the FIN, and send an acknowledgment for the FIN.  Note that
FIN implies PUSH for any segment text not yet delivered to the
Enter the CLOSE-WAIT state.
If our FIN has been ACKed (perhaps in this segment), then
enter TIME-WAIT, start the time-wait timer, turn off the other
timers; otherwise enter the CLOSING state.
Enter the TIME-WAIT state.  Start the time-wait timer, turn
Remain in the CLOSE-WAIT state.
Remain in the CLOSING state.
Remain in the LAST-ACK state.
Remain in the TIME-WAIT state.  Restart the 2 MSL time-wait
For any state if the user timeout expires, flush all queues, signal
the user "error:  connection aborted due to user timeout" in general
and for any outstanding calls, delete the TCB, enter the CLOSED
For any state if the retransmission timeout expires on a segment in
the retransmission queue, send the segment at the front of the
retransmission queue again, reinitialize the retransmission timer,
If the time-wait timeout expires on a connection delete the TCB,
enter the CLOSED state and return.
BBN Report 1822, "The Specification of the Interconnection of
a Host and an IMP".  The specification of interface between a
A control bit (acknowledge) occupying no sequence space, which
indicates that the acknowledgment field of this segment
specifies the next sequence number the sender of this segment
is expecting to receive, hence acknowledging receipt of all
previous sequence numbers.
The unit of transmission between a host and an IMP in the
A unit of transmission used internally in the ARPANET between
A logical communication path identified by a pair of sockets.
A message sent in a packet switched computer communications
The destination address, usually the network and host
A control bit (finis) occupying one sequence number, which
indicates that the sender will send no more data or control
occupying sequence space.
A portion of a logical unit of data, in particular an internet
fragment is a portion of an internet datagram.
A file transfer protocol.
Control information at the beginning of a message, segment,
fragment, packet or block of data.
A computer.  In particular a source or destination of messages
from the point of view of the communication network.
An Internet Protocol field.  This identifying value assigned
by the sender aids in assembling the fragments of a datagram.
The Interface Message Processor, the packet switch of the
A source or destination address specific to the host level.
The unit of data exchanged between an internet module and the
higher level protocol together with the internet header.
A portion of the data of an internet datagram with an internet
The Initial Receive Sequence number.  The first sequence
number used by the sender on a connection.
The Initial Sequence Number.  The first sequence number used
on a connection, (either ISS or IRS).  Selected on a clock
The Initial Send Sequence number.  The first sequence number
used by the sender on a connection.
Control information at the beginning of a message or block of
data.  In particular, in the ARPANET, the control information
on an ARPANET message at the host-IMP interface.
This is the next sequence number to be acknowledged by the
data receiving TCP (or the lowest currently unacknowledged
sequence number) and is sometimes referred to as the left edge
The unit of transmission within a local network.
An implementation, usually in software, of a protocol or other
Maximum Segment Lifetime, the time a TCP segment can exist in
the internetwork system.  Arbitrarily defined to be 2 minutes.
An Option field may contain several options, and each option
may be several octets in length.  The options are used
primarily in testing situations; for example, to carry
timestamps.  Both the Internet Protocol and TCP provide for
A package of data with a header which may or may not be
logically complete.  More often a physical packaging than a
logical packaging of data.
The portion of a socket that specifies which logical input or
output channel of a process is associated with the data.
A program in execution.  A source or destination of data from
the point of view of the TCP or other host-to-host protocol.
A control bit occupying no sequence space, indicating that
this segment contains data that must be pushed through to the
receive next sequence number
receive urgent pointer
This is the next sequence number the local TCP is expecting to
This represents the sequence numbers the local (receiving) TCP
is willing to receive.  Thus, the local TCP considers that
segments overlapping the range RCV.NXT to
RCV.NXT + RCV.WND - 1 carry acceptable data or control.
Segments containing sequence numbers entirely outside of this
range are considered duplicates and discarded.
A control bit (reset), occupying no sequence space, indicating
that the receiver should delete the connection without further
interaction.  The receiver can determine, based on the
sequence number and acknowledgment fields of the incoming
segment, whether it should honor the reset command or ignore
it.  In no case does receipt of a segment containing RST give
rise to a RST in response.
Real Time Protocol:  A host-to-host protocol for communication
of time critical information.
segment acknowledgment
segment precedence value
segment urgent pointer field
A logical unit of data, in particular a TCP segment is the
unit of data transfered between a pair of TCP modules.
The sequence number in the acknowledgment field of the
The amount of sequence number space occupied by a segment,
including any controls which occupy sequence space.
The number in the sequence field of the arriving segment.
This is the next sequence number the local (sending) TCP will
use on the connection.  It is initially selected from an
initial sequence number curve (ISN) and is incremented for
each octet of data or sequenced control transmitted.
This represents the sequence numbers which the remote
(receiving) TCP is willing to receive.  It is the value of the
window field specified in segments from the remote (data
receiving) TCP.  The range of new sequence numbers which may
be emitted by a TCP lies between SND.NXT and
SND.UNA + SND.WND - 1. (Retransmissions of sequence numbers
between SND.UNA and SND.NXT are expected, of course.)
segment sequence number at last window update
segment acknowledgment number at last window update
An address which specifically includes a port identifier, that
is, the concatenation of an Internet Address with a TCP port.
The source address, usually the network and host identifiers.
A control bit in the incoming segment, occupying one sequence
number, used at the initiation of a connection, to indicate
where the sequence numbering will start.
Transmission control block, the data structure that records
the state of a connection.
The precedence of the connection.
Transmission Control Protocol:  A host-to-host protocol for
reliable communication in internetwork environments.
Type of Service, an Internet Protocol field.
An Internet Protocol field which indicates the type of service
for this internet fragment.
A control bit (urgent), occupying no sequence space, used to
indicate that the receiving user should be notified to do
urgent processing as long as there is data to be consumed with
sequence numbers less than the value indicated in the urgent
A control field meaningful only when the URG bit is on.  This
field communicates the value of the urgent pointer which
indicates the data octet associated with the sending user's
[1]  Cerf, V., and R. Kahn, "A Protocol for Packet Network
Intercommunication", IEEE Transactions on Communications,
Protocol Specification", RFC 791, USC/Information Sciences
[3]  Dalal, Y. and C. Sunshine, "Connection Management in Transport
This RFC specifies a standard for the ARPA Internet community.  Hosts on
the ARPA Internet are expected to adopt and implement this standard.
The purpose of the TELNET Protocol is to provide a fairly general,
bi-directional, eight-bit byte oriented communications facility.  Its
primary goal is to allow a standard method of interfacing terminal
devices and terminal-oriented processes to each other.  It is
envisioned that the protocol may also be used for terminal-terminal
communication ("linking") and process-process communication
(distributed computation).
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
A TELNET connection is a Transmission Control Protocol (TCP)
connection used to transmit data with interspersed TELNET control
The TELNET Protocol is built upon three main ideas:  first, the
concept of a "Network Virtual Terminal"; second, the principle of
negotiated options; and third, a symmetric view of terminals and
assumed to originate and terminate at a "Network Virtual Terminal",
or NVT.  An NVT is an imaginary device which provides a standard,
network-wide, intermediate representation of a canonical terminal.
This eliminates the need for "server" and "user" hosts to keep
information about the characteristics of each other's terminals and
terminal handling conventions.  All hosts, both user and server, map
their local device characteristics and conventions so as to appear to
be dealing with an NVT over the network, and each can assume a
similar mapping by the other party.  The NVT is intended to strike a
balance between being overly restricted (not providing hosts a rich
enough vocabulary for mapping into their local character sets), and
being overly inclusive (penalizing users with modest terminals).
NOTE:  The "user" host is the host to which the physical terminal
is normally attached, and the "server" host is the host which is
normally providing some service.  As an alternate point of view,
applicable even in terminal-to-terminal or process-to-process
communications, the "user" host is the host which initiated the
that many hosts will wish to provide additional services over and
above those available within an NVT, and many users will have
sophisticated terminals and would like to have elegant, rather than
minimal, services.  Independent of, but structured within the TELNET
Protocol are various "options" that will be sanctioned and may be
used with the "DO, DON'T, WILL, WON'T" structure (discussed below) to
allow a user and server to agree to use a more elaborate (or perhaps
just different) set of conventions for their TELNET connection.  Such
options could include changing the character set, the echo mode, etc.
The basic strategy for setting up the use of options is to have
either party (or both) initiate a request that some option take
effect.  The other party may then either accept or reject the
request.  If the request is accepted the option immediately takes
effect; if it is rejected the associated aspect of the connection
remains as specified for an NVT.  Clearly, a party may always refuse
a request to enable, and must never refuse a request to disable some
option since all parties must be prepared to support the NVT.
The syntax of option negotiation has been set up so that if both
parties request an option simultaneously, each will see the other's
request as the positive acknowledgment of its own.
nonterminating acknowledgment loops -- each party seeing the incoming
commands not as acknowledgments but as new requests which must be
acknowledged.  To prevent such loops, the following rules prevail:
a. Parties may only request a change in option status; i.e., a
party may not send out a "request" merely to announce what mode it
b. If a party receives what appears to be a request to enter some
mode it is already in, the request should not be acknowledged.
This non-response is essential to prevent endless loops in the
negotiation.  It is required that a response be sent to requests
for a change of mode -- even if the mode is not changed.
c. Whenever one party sends an option command to a second party,
whether as a request or an acknowledgment, and use of the option
will have any effect on the processing of the data being sent from
the first party to the second, then the command must be inserted
in the data stream at the point where it is desired that it take
effect.  (It should be noted that some time will elapse between
the transmission of a request and the receipt of an
acknowledgment, which may be negative.  Thus, a host may wish to
buffer data, after requesting an option, until it learns whether
the request is accepted or rejected, in order to hide the
"uncertainty period" from the user.)
Option requests are likely to flurry back and forth when a TELNET
connection is first established, as each party attempts to get the
best possible service from the other party.  Beyond that, however,
options can be used to dynamically modify the characteristics of the
connection to suit changing local conditions.  For example, the NVT,
as will be explained later, uses a transmission discipline well
suited to the many "line at a time" applications such as BASIC, but
poorly suited to the many "character at a time" applications such as
NLS.  A server might elect to devote the extra processor overhead
required for a "character at a time" discipline when it was suitable
for the local process and would negotiate an appropriate option.
However, rather than then being permanently burdened with the extra
processing overhead, it could switch (i.e., negotiate) back to NVT
when the detailed control was no longer necessary.
It is possible for requests initiated by processes to stimulate a
nonterminating request loop if the process responds to a rejection by
merely re-requesting the option.  To prevent such loops from
occurring, rejected requests should not be repeated until something
changes.  Operationally, this can mean the process is running a
different program, or the user has given another command, or whatever
makes sense in the context of the given process and the given option.
A good rule of thumb is that a re-request should only occur as a
result of subsequent information from the other end of the connection
or when demanded by local human intervention.
Option designers should not feel constrained by the somewhat limited
syntax available for option negotiation.  The intent of the simple
syntax is to make it easy to have options -- since it is
correspondingly easy to profess ignorance about them.  If some
particular option requires a richer negotiation structure than
possible within "DO, DON'T, WILL, WON'T", the proper tack is to use
"DO, DON'T, WILL, WON'T" to establish that both parties understand
the option, and once this is accomplished a more exotic syntax can be
used freely.  For example, a party might send a request to alter
(establish) line length.  If it is accepted, then a different syntax
can be used for actually negotiating the line length -- such a
"sub-negotiation" might include fields for minimum allowable, maximum
allowable and desired line lengths.  The important concept is that
such expanded negotiations should never begin until some prior
(standard) negotiation has established that both parties are capable
of parsing the expanded syntax.
In summary, WILL XXX is sent, by either party, to indicate that
party's desire (offer) to begin performing option XXX, DO XXX and
DON'T XXX being its positive and negative acknowledgments; similarly,
DO XXX is sent to indicate a desire (request) that the other party
(i.e., the recipient of the DO) begin performing option XXX, WILL XXX
and WON'T XXX being the positive and negative acknowledgments.  Since
the NVT is what is left when no options are enabled, the DON'T and
WON'T responses are guaranteed to leave the connection in a state
which both ends can handle.  Thus, all hosts may implement their
TELNET processes to be totally unaware of options that are not
supported, simply returning a rejection to (i.e., refusing) any
option request that cannot be understood.
As much as possible, the TELNET protocol has been made server-user
symmetrical so that it easily and naturally covers the user-user
(linking) and server-server (cooperating processes) cases.  It is
hoped, but not absolutely required, that options will further this
intent.  In any case, it is explicitly acknowledged that symmetry is
an operating principle rather than an ironclad rule.
A companion document, "TELNET Option Specifications," should be
consulted for information about the procedure for establishing new
THE NETWORK VIRTUAL TERMINAL
The Network Virtual Terminal (NVT) is a bi-directional character
device.  The NVT has a printer and a keyboard.  The printer responds
to incoming data and the keyboard produces outgoing data which is
sent over the TELNET connection and, if "echoes" are desired, to the
NVT's printer as well.  "Echoes" will not be expected to traverse the
network (although options exist to enable a "remote" echoing mode of
operation, no host is required to implement this option).  The code
set is seven-bit USASCII in an eight-bit field, except as modified
herein.  Any code conversion and timing considerations are local
problems and do not affect the NVT.
Although a TELNET connection through the network is intrinsically
full duplex, the NVT is to be viewed as a half-duplex device
operating in a line-buffered mode.  That is, unless and until
options are negotiated to the contrary, the following default
conditions pertain to the transmission of data over the TELNET
1)  Insofar as the availability of local buffer space permits,
data should be accumulated in the host where it is generated
until a complete line of data is ready for transmission, or
until some locally-defined explicit signal to transmit occurs.
This signal could be generated either by a process or by a
The motivation for this rule is the high cost, to some hosts,
of processing network input interrupts, coupled with the
default NVT specification that "echoes" do not traverse the
network.  Thus, it is reasonable to buffer some amount of data
at its source.  Many systems take some processing action at the
end of each input line (even line printers or card punches
frequently tend to work this way), so the transmission should
be triggered at the end of a line.  On the other hand, a user
or process may sometimes find it necessary or desirable to
provide data which does not terminate at the end of a line;
therefore implementers are cautioned to provide methods of
locally signaling that all buffered data should be transmitted
2)  When a process has completed sending data to an NVT printer
and has no queued input from the NVT keyboard for further
processing (i.e., when a process at one end of a TELNET
connection cannot proceed without input from the other end),
the process must transmit the TELNET Go Ahead (GA) command.
This rule is not intended to require that the TELNET GA command
be sent from a terminal at the end of each line, since server
hosts do not normally require a special signal (in addition to
end-of-line or other locally-defined characters) in order to
commence processing.  Rather, the TELNET GA is designed to help
a user's local host operate a physically half duplex terminal
which has a "lockable" keyboard such as the IBM 2741.  A
description of this type of terminal may help to explain the
proper use of the GA command.
The terminal-computer connection is always under control of
either the user or the computer.  Neither can unilaterally
seize control from the other; rather the controlling end must
relinguish its control explicitly.  At the terminal end, the
hardware is constructed so as to relinquish control each time
that a "line" is terminated (i.e., when the "New Line" key is
typed by the user).  When this occurs, the attached (local)
computer processes the input data, decides if output should be
generated, and if not returns control to the terminal.  If
output should be generated, control is retained by the computer
until all output has been transmitted.
The difficulties of using this type of terminal through the
network should be obvious.  The "local" computer is no longer
able to decide whether to retain control after seeing an
end-of-line signal or not; this decision can only be made by
the "remote" computer which is processing the data.  Therefore,
the TELNET GA command provides a mechanism whereby the "remote"
(server) computer can signal the "local" (user) computer that
it is time to pass control to the user of the terminal.  It
should be transmitted at those times, and only at those times,
when the user should be given control of the terminal.  Note
that premature transmission of the GA command may result in the
blocking of output, since the user is likely to assume that the
transmitting system has paused, and therefore he will fail to
turn the line around manually.
The foregoing, of course, does not apply to the user-to-server
direction of communication.  In this direction, GAs may be sent at
any time, but need not ever be sent.  Also, if the TELNET
connection is being used for process-to-process communication, GAs
need not be sent in either direction.  Finally, for
terminal-to-terminal communication, GAs may be required in
neither, one, or both directions.  If a host plans to support
terminal-to-terminal communication it is suggested that the host
provide the user with a means of manually signaling that it is
time for a GA to be sent over the TELNET connection; this,
however, is not a requirement on the implementer of a TELNET
Note that the symmetry of the TELNET model requires that there is
an NVT at each end of the TELNET connection, at least
STANDARD REPRESENTATION OF CONTROL FUNCTIONS
As stated in the Introduction to this document, the primary goal
of the TELNET protocol is the provision of a standard interfacing
of terminal devices and terminal-oriented processes through the
network.  Early experiences with this type of interconnection have
shown that certain functions are implemented by most servers, but
that the methods of invoking these functions differ widely.  For a
human user who interacts with several server systems, these
differences are highly frustrating.  TELNET, therefore, defines a
standard representation for five of these functions, as described
below.  These standard representations have standard, but not
required, meanings (with the exception that the Interrupt Process
(IP) function may be required by other protocols which use
TELNET); that is, a system which does not provide the function to
local users need not provide it to network users and may treat the
standard representation for the function as a No-operation.  On
the other hand, a system which does provide the function to a
local user is obliged to provide the same function to a network
user who transmits the standard representation for the function.
Many systems provide a function which suspends, interrupts,
aborts, or terminates the operation of a user process.  This
function is frequently used when a user believes his process is
in an unending loop, or when an unwanted process has been
inadvertently activated.  IP is the standard representation for
invoking this function.  It should be noted by implementers
that IP may be required by other protocols which use TELNET,
and therefore should be implemented if these other protocols
Many systems provide a function which allows a process, which
is generating output, to run to completion (or to reach the
same stopping point it would reach if running to completion)
but without sending the output to the user's terminal.
Further, this function typically clears any output already
produced but not yet actually printed (or displayed) on the
user's terminal.  AO is the standard representation for
invoking this function.  For example, some subsystem might
normally accept a user's command, send a long text string to
the user's terminal in response, and finally signal readiness
to accept the next command by sending a "prompt" character
(preceded by <CR><LF>) to the user's terminal.  If the AO were
received during the transmission of the text string, a
reasonable implementation would be to suppress the remainder of
the text string, but transmit the prompt character and the
preceding <CR><LF>.  (This is possibly in distinction to the
action which might be taken if an IP were received; the IP
might cause suppression of the text string and an exit from the
It should be noted, by server systems which provide this
function, that there may be buffers external to the system (in
the network and the user's local host) which should be cleared;
the appropriate way to do this is to transmit the "Synch"
signal (described below) to the user system.
Many systems provide a function which provides the user with
some visible (e.g., printable) evidence that the system is
still up and running.  This function may be invoked by the user
when the system is unexpectedly "silent" for a long time,
because of the unanticipated (by the user) length of a
computation, an unusually heavy system load, etc.  AYT is the
standard representation for invoking this function.
Many systems provide a function which deletes the last
preceding undeleted character or "print position"* from the
stream of data being supplied by the user.  This function is
typically used to edit keyboard input when typing mistakes are
made.  EC is the standard representation for invoking this
*NOTE:  A "print position" may contain several characters
which are the result of overstrikes, or of sequences such as
Many systems provide a function which deletes all the data in
the current "line" of input.  This function is typically used
to edit keyboard input.  EL is the standard representation for
invoking this function.
THE TELNET "SYNCH" SIGNAL
Most time-sharing systems provide mechanisms which allow a
terminal user to regain control of a "runaway" process; the IP and
AO functions described above are examples of these mechanisms.
Such systems, when used locally, have access to all of the signals
supplied by the user, whether these are normal characters or
special "out of band" signals such as those supplied by the
teletype "BREAK" key or the IBM 2741 "ATTN" key.  This is not
necessarily true when terminals are connected to the system
through the network; the network's flow control mechanisms may
cause such a signal to be buffered elsewhere, for example in the
To counter this problem, the TELNET "Synch" mechanism is
introduced.  A Synch signal consists of a TCP Urgent notification,
coupled with the TELNET command DATA MARK.  The Urgent
notification, which is not subject to the flow control pertaining
to the TELNET connection, is used to invoke special handling of
the data stream by the process which receives it.  In this mode,
the data stream is immediately scanned for "interesting" signals
as defined below, discarding intervening data.  The TELNET command
DATA MARK (DM) is the synchronizing mark in the data stream which
indicates that any special signal has already occurred and the
recipient can return to normal processing of the data stream.
The Synch is sent via the TCP send operation with the Urgent
flag set and the DM as the last (or only) data octet.
When several Synchs are sent in rapid succession, the Urgent
notifications may be merged.  It is not possible to count Urgents
since the number received will be less than or equal the number
sent.  When in normal mode, a DM is a no operation; when in urgent
mode, it signals the end of the urgent processing.
If TCP indicates the end of Urgent data before the DM is found,
TELNET should continue the special handling of the data stream
If TCP indicates more Urgent data after the DM is found, it can
only be because of a subsequent Synch.  TELNET should continue
the special handling of the data stream until another DM is
"Interesting" signals are defined to be:  the TELNET standard
representations of IP, AO, and AYT (but not EC or EL); the local
analogs of these standard representations (if any); all other
TELNET commands; other site-defined signals which can be acted on
without delaying the scan of the data stream.
Since one effect of the SYNCH mechanism is the discarding of
essentially all characters (except TELNET commands) between the
sender of the Synch and its recipient, this mechanism is specified
as the standard way to clear the data path when that is desired.
For example, if a user at a terminal causes an AO to be
transmitted, the server which receives the AO (if it provides that
function at all) should return a Synch to the user.
Finally, just as the TCP Urgent notification is needed at the
TELNET level as an out-of-band signal, so other protocols which
make use of TELNET may require a TELNET command which can be
viewed as an out-of-band signal at a different level.
By convention the sequence [IP, Synch] is to be used as such a
signal.  For example, suppose that some other protocol, which uses
TELNET, defines the character string STOP analogously to the
TELNET command AO.  Imagine that a user of this protocol wishes a
server to process the STOP string, but the connection is blocked
because the server is processing other commands.  The user should
Send the Data Mark (DM) as the only character
in a TCP urgent mode send operation.
The user (or process acting on his behalf) must transmit the
TELNET SYNCH sequence of step 2 above to ensure that the TELNET IP
gets through to the server's TELNET interpreter.
The Urgent should wake up the TELNET process; the IP should
wake up the next higher level process.
THE NVT PRINTER AND KEYBOARD
The NVT printer has an unspecified carriage width and page length
and can produce representations of all 95 USASCII graphics (codes
following have specified meaning to the NVT printer:
Carriage Return (CR)   13      Moves the printer to the left
In addition, the following codes shall have defined, but not
required, effects on the NVT printer.  Neither end of a TELNET
connection may assume that the other party will take, or will
have taken, any particular action upon receipt or transmission
All remaining codes do not cause the NVT printer to take any
The sequence "CR LF", as defined, will cause the NVT to be
positioned at the left margin of the next print line (as would,
for example, the sequence "LF CR").  However, many systems and
terminals do not treat CR and LF independently, and will have to
go to some effort to simulate their effect.  (For example, some
terminals do not have a CR independent of the LF, but on such
terminals it may be possible to simulate a CR by backspacing.)
Therefore, the sequence "CR LF" must be treated as a single "new
line" character and used whenever their combined action is
intended; the sequence "CR NUL" must be used where a carriage
return alone is actually desired; and the CR character must be
avoided in other contexts.  This rule gives assurance to systems
which must decide whether to perform a "new line" function or a
multiple-backspace that the TELNET stream contains a character
following a CR that will allow a rational decision.
Note that "CR LF" or "CR NUL" is required in both directions
(in the default ASCII mode), to preserve the symmetry of the
NVT model.  Even though it may be known in some situations
(e.g., with remote echo and suppress go ahead options in
effect) that characters are not being sent to an actual
printer, nonetheless, for the sake of consistency, the protocol
requires that a NUL be inserted following a CR not followed by
a LF in the data stream.  The converse of this is that a NUL
received in the data stream after a CR (in the absence of
options negotiations which explicitly specify otherwise) should
be stripped out prior to applying the NVT to local character
The NVT keyboard has keys, or key combinations, or key sequences,
for generating all 128 USASCII codes.  Note that although many
have no effect on the NVT printer, the NVT keyboard is capable of
In addition to these codes, the NVT keyboard shall be capable of
generating the following additional codes which, except as noted,
have defined, but not reguired, meanings.  The actual code
assignments for these "characters" are in the TELNET Command
section, because they are viewed as being, in some sense, generic
and should be available even when the data stream is interpreted
as being some other character set.
This key allows the user to clear his data path to the other
party.  The activation of this key causes a DM (see command
section) to be sent in the data stream and a TCP Urgent
notification is associated with it.  The pair DM-Urgent is to
have required meaning as defined previously.
This code is provided because it is a signal outside the
USASCII set which is currently given local meaning within many
systems.  It is intended to indicate that the Break Key or the
Attention Key was hit.  Note, however, that this is intended to
provide a 129th code for systems which require it, not as a
synonym for the IP standard representation.
Suspend, interrupt, abort or terminate the process to which the
NVT is connected.  Also, part of the out-of-band signal for
other protocols which use TELNET.
Allow the current process to (appear to) run to completion, but
do not send its output to the user.  Also, send a Synch to the
Send back to the NVT some visible (i.e., printable) evidence
that the AYT was received.
The recipient should delete the last preceding undeleted
character or "print position" from the data stream.
The recipient should delete characters from the data stream
back to, but not including, the last "CR LF" sequence sent over
The spirit of these "extra" keys, and also the printer format
effectors, is that they should represent a natural extension of
the mapping that already must be done from "NVT" into "local".
Just as the NVT data byte 68 (104 octal) should be mapped into
whatever the local code for "uppercase D" is, so the EC character
should be mapped into whatever the local "Erase Character"
function is.  Further, just as the mapping for 124 (174 octal) is
somewhat arbitrary in an environment that has no "vertical bar"
character, the EL character may have a somewhat arbitrary mapping
(or none at all) if there is no local "Erase Line" facility.
Similarly for format effectors:  if the terminal actually does
have a "Vertical Tab", then the mapping for VT is obvious, and
only when the terminal does not have a vertical tab should the
effect of VT be unpredictable.
TELNET COMMAND STRUCTURE
All TELNET commands consist of at least a two byte sequence:  the
"Interpret as Command" (IAC) escape character followed by the code
for the command.  The commands dealing with option negotiation are
three byte sequences, the third byte being the code for the option
referenced.  This format was chosen so that as more comprehensive use
of the "data space" is made -- by negotiations from the basic NVT, of
course -- collisions of data bytes with reserved command values will
be minimized, all such collisions requiring the inconvenience, and
inefficiency, of "escaping" the data bytes into the stream.  With the
current set-up, only the IAC need be doubled to be sent as data, and
the other 255 codes may be passed transparently.
The following are the defined TELNET commands.  Note that these codes
and code sequences have the indicated meaning only when immediately
Interrupt Process   244    The function IP.
Erase character     247    The function EC.
WILL (option code)  251    Indicates the desire to begin
WON'T (option code) 252    Indicates the refusal to perform,
DO (option code)    253    Indicates the request that the
DON'T (option code) 254    Indicates the demand that the
CONNECTION ESTABLISHMENT
The TELNET TCP connection is established between the user's port U
and the server's port L.  The server listens on its well known port L
for such connections.  Since a TCP connection is full duplex and
identified by the pair of ports, the server can engage in many
simultaneous connections involving its port L and different user
When used for remote user access to service hosts (i.e., remote
terminal access) this protocol is assigned server port 23
This memo is the official specification of the File Transfer
Protocol (FTP).  Distribution of this memo is unlimited.
The following new optional commands are included in this edition of
CDUP (Change to Parent Directory), SMNT (Structure Mount), STOU
(Store Unique), RMD (Remove Directory), MKD (Make Directory), PWD
(Print Directory), and SYST (System).
Note that this specification is compatible with the previous edition.
The objectives of FTP are 1) to promote sharing of files (computer
programs and/or data), 2) to encourage indirect or implicit (via
programs) use of remote computers, 3) to shield a user from
variations in file storage systems among hosts, and 4) to transfer
data reliably and efficiently.  FTP, though usable directly by a user
at a terminal, is designed mainly for use by programs.
The attempt in this specification is to satisfy the diverse needs of
users of maxi-hosts, mini-hosts, personal workstations, and TACs,
with a simple, and easily implemented protocol design.
This paper assumes knowledge of the Transmission Control Protocol
(TCP) [2] and the Telnet Protocol [3].  These documents are contained
in the ARPA-Internet protocol handbook [1].
In this section, the history, the terminology, and the FTP model are
discussed.  The terms defined in this section are only those that
have special significance in FTP.  Some of the terminology is very
specific to the FTP model; some readers may wish to turn to the
section on the FTP model while reviewing the terminology.
File Transfer Protocol
FTP has had a long evolution over the years.  Appendix III is a
chronological compilation of Request for Comments documents
relating to FTP.  These include the first proposed file transfer
mechanisms in 1971 that were developed for implementation on hosts
at M.I.T. (RFC 114), plus comments and discussion in RFC 141.
RFC 172 provided a user-level oriented protocol for file transfer
between host computers (including terminal IMPs).  A revision of
this as RFC 265, restated FTP for additional review, while RFC 281
suggested further changes.  The use of a "Set Data Type"
transaction was proposed in RFC 294 in January 1982.
RFC 354 obsoleted RFCs 264 and 265.  The File Transfer Protocol
was now defined as a protocol for file transfer between HOSTs on
the ARPANET, with the primary function of FTP defined as
transfering files efficiently and reliably among hosts and
allowing the convenient use of remote file storage capabilities.
RFC 385 further commented on errors, emphasis points, and
additions to the protocol, while RFC 414 provided a status report
on the working server and user FTPs.  RFC 430, issued in 1973,
(among other RFCs too numerous to mention) presented further
comments on FTP.  Finally, an "official" FTP document was
By July 1973, considerable changes from the last versions of FTP
were made, but the general structure remained the same.  RFC 542
was published as a new "official" specification to reflect these
changes.  However, many implementations based on the older
specification were not updated.
proposed further design changes and minor modifications.  In 1975,
RFC 686 entitled, "Leaving Well Enough Alone", discussed the
differences between all of the early and later versions of FTP.
RFC 691 presented a minor revision of RFC 686, regarding the
Motivated by the transition from the NCP to the TCP as the
underlying protocol, a phoenix was born out of all of the above
efforts in RFC 765 as the specification of FTP for use on TCP.
This current edition of the FTP specification is intended to
correct some minor documentation errors, to improve the
explanation of some protocol features, and to add some new
In particular, the following new optional commands are included in
this edition of the specification:
CDUP - Change to Parent Directory
This specification is compatible with the previous edition.  A
program implemented in conformance to the previous specification
should automatically be in conformance to this specification.
The ASCII character set is as defined in the ARPA-Internet
Protocol Handbook.  In FTP, ASCII characters are defined to be
the lower half of an eight-bit code set (i.e., the most
significant bit is zero).
Access controls define users' access privileges to the use of a
system, and to the files in that system.  Access controls are
necessary to prevent unauthorized or accidental use of files.
It is the prerogative of a server-FTP process to invoke access
There are two byte sizes of interest in FTP:  the logical byte
size of the file, and the transfer byte size used for the
transmission of the data.  The transfer byte size is always 8
bits.  The transfer byte size is not necessarily the byte size
in which data is to be stored in a system, nor the logical byte
size for interpretation of the structure of the data.
The communication path between the USER-PI and SERVER-PI for
the exchange of commands and replies.  This connection follows
A full duplex connection over which data is transferred, in a
specified mode and type. The data transferred may be a part of
a file, an entire file or a number of files.  The path may be
between a server-DTP and a user-DTP, or between two
The passive data transfer process "listens" on the data port
for a connection from the active transfer process in order to
open the data connection.
The data transfer process establishes and manages the data
connection.  The DTP can be passive or active.
The end-of-line sequence defines the separation of printing
lines.  The sequence is Carriage Return, followed by Line Feed.
The end-of-file condition that defines the end of a file being
The end-of-record condition that defines the end of a record
A procedure that allows a user to recover from certain errors
such as failure of either host system or transfer process.  In
FTP, error recovery may involve restarting a file transfer at a
A set of commands that comprise the control information flowing
from the user-FTP to the server-FTP process.
An ordered set of computer data (including programs), of
arbitrary length, uniquely identified by a pathname.
The mode in which data is to be transferred via the data
connection.  The mode defines the data format during transfer
including EOR and EOF.  The transfer modes defined in FTP are
described in the Section on Transmission Modes.
The Network Virtual Terminal as defined in the Telnet Protocol.
The Network Virtual File System.  A concept which defines a
standard network file system with standard commands and
A file may be structured as a set of independent parts called
pages.  FTP supports the transmission of discontinuous files as
independent indexed pages.
Pathname is defined to be the character string which must be
input to a file system by a user in order to identify a file.
Pathname normally contains device and/or directory names, and
file name specification.  FTP does not yet specify a standard
pathname convention.  Each user must follow the file naming
conventions of the file systems involved in the transfer.
The protocol interpreter.  The user and server sides of the
protocol have distinct roles implemented in a user-PI and a
A sequential file may be structured as a number of contiguous
parts called records.  Record structures are supported by FTP
but a file need not have record structure.
A reply is an acknowledgment (positive or negative) sent from
server to user via the control connection in response to FTP
commands.  The general form of a reply is a completion code
(including error codes) followed by a text string.  The codes
are for use by programs and the text is usually intended for
The data transfer process, in its normal "active" state,
establishes the data connection with the "listening" data port.
It sets up parameters for transfer and storage, and transfers
data on command from its PI.  The DTP can be placed in a
"passive" state to listen for, rather than initiate a
connection on the data port.
A process or set of processes which perform the function of
file transfer in cooperation with a user-FTP process and,
possibly, another server.  The functions consist of a protocol
interpreter (PI) and a data transfer process (DTP).
The server protocol interpreter "listens" on Port L for a
connection from a user-PI and establishes a control
communication connection.  It receives standard FTP commands
from the user-PI, sends replies, and governs the server-DTP.
The data representation type used for data transfer and
storage.  Type implies certain transformations between the time
of data storage and data transfer.  The representation types
defined in FTP are described in the Section on Establishing
A person or a process on behalf of a person wishing to obtain
file transfer service.  The human user may interact directly
with a server-FTP process, but use of a user-FTP process is
preferred since the protocol design is weighted towards
The data transfer process "listens" on the data port for a
connection from a server-FTP process.  If two servers are
transferring data between them, the user-DTP is inactive.
A set of functions including a protocol interpreter, a data
transfer process and a user interface which together perform
the function of file transfer in cooperation with one or more
server-FTP processes.  The user interface allows a local
language to be used in the command-reply dialogue with the
The user protocol interpreter initiates the control connection
from its port U to the server-FTP process, initiates FTP
commands, and governs the user-DTP if that process is part of
With the above definitions in mind, the following model (shown in
Figure 1) may be diagrammed for an FTP service.
NOTES: 1. The data connection may be used in either direction.
In the model described in Figure 1, the user-protocol interpreter
initiates the control connection.  The control connection follows
the Telnet protocol.  At the initiation of the user, standard FTP
commands are generated by the user-PI and transmitted to the
server process via the control connection.  (The user may
establish a direct control connection to the server-FTP, from a
TAC terminal for example, and generate standard FTP commands
independently, bypassing the user-FTP process.) Standard replies
are sent from the server-PI to the user-PI over the control
connection in response to the commands.
The FTP commands specify the parameters for the data connection
(data port, transfer mode, representation type, and structure) and
the nature of file system operation (store, retrieve, append,
delete, etc.).  The user-DTP or its designate should "listen" on
the specified data port, and the server initiate the data
connection and data transfer in accordance with the specified
parameters.  It should be noted that the data port need not be in
the same host that initiates the FTP commands via the control
connection, but the user or the user-FTP process must ensure a
"listen" on the specified data port.  It ought to also be noted
that the data connection may be used for simultaneous sending and
In another situation a user might wish to transfer files between
two hosts, neither of which is a local host. The user sets up
control connections to the two servers and then arranges for a
data connection between them.  In this manner, control information
is passed to the user-PI but data is transferred between the
server data transfer processes.  Following is a model of this
server-server interaction.
The protocol requires that the control connections be open while
data transfer is in progress.  It is the responsibility of the
user to request the closing of the control connections when
finished using the FTP service, while it is the server who takes
the action.  The server may abort data transfer if the control
connections are closed without command.
The Relationship between FTP and Telnet:
The FTP uses the Telnet protocol on the control connection.
This can be achieved in two ways: first, the user-PI or the
server-PI may implement the rules of the Telnet Protocol
directly in their own procedures; or, second, the user-PI or
the server-PI may make use of the existing Telnet module in the
Ease of implementaion, sharing code, and modular programming
argue for the second approach.  Efficiency and independence
argue for the first approach.  In practice, FTP relies on very
little of the Telnet Protocol, so the first approach does not
necessarily involve a large amount of code.
Files are transferred only via the data connection.  The control
connection is used for the transfer of commands, which describe the
functions to be performed, and the replies to these commands (see the
Section on FTP Replies).  Several commands are concerned with the
transfer of data between hosts.  These data transfer commands include
the MODE command which specify how the bits of the data are to be
transmitted, and the STRUcture and TYPE commands, which are used to
define the way in which the data are to be represented.  The
transmission and representation are basically independent but the
"Stream" transmission mode is dependent on the file structure
attribute and if "Compressed" transmission mode is used, the nature
of the filler byte depends on the representation type.
Data is transferred from a storage device in the sending host to a
storage device in the receiving host.  Often it is necessary to
perform certain transformations on the data because data storage
representations in the two systems are different.  For example,
NVT-ASCII has different data storage representations in different
systems.  DEC TOPS-20s's generally store NVT-ASCII as five 7-bit
ASCII characters, left-justified in a 36-bit word. IBM Mainframe's
store NVT-ASCII as 8-bit EBCDIC codes.  Multics stores NVT-ASCII
as four 9-bit characters in a 36-bit word.  It is desirable to
convert characters into the standard NVT-ASCII representation when
transmitting text between dissimilar systems.  The sending and
receiving sites would have to perform the necessary
transformations between the standard representation and their
internal representations.
A different problem in representation arises when transmitting
binary data (not character codes) between host systems with
different word lengths.  It is not always clear how the sender
should send data, and the receiver store it.  For example, when
transmitting 32-bit bytes from a 32-bit word-length system to a
36-bit word-length system, it may be desirable (for reasons of
efficiency and usefulness) to store the 32-bit bytes
right-justified in a 36-bit word in the latter system.  In any
case, the user should have the option of specifying data
representation and transformation functions.  It should be noted
that FTP provides for very limited data type representations.
Transformations desired beyond this limited capability should be
performed by the user directly.
Data representations are handled in FTP by a user specifying a
representation type.  This type may implicitly (as in ASCII or
EBCDIC) or explicitly (as in Local byte) define a byte size for
interpretation which is referred to as the "logical byte size."
Note that this has nothing to do with the byte size used for
transmission over the data connection, called the "transfer
byte size", and the two should not be confused.  For example,
NVT-ASCII has a logical byte size of 8 bits.  If the type is
Local byte, then the TYPE command has an obligatory second
parameter specifying the logical byte size.  The transfer byte
This is the default type and must be accepted by all FTP
implementations.  It is intended primarily for the transfer
of text files, except when both hosts would find the EBCDIC
The sender converts the data from an internal character
representation to the standard 8-bit NVT-ASCII
representation (see the Telnet specification).  The receiver
will convert the data from the standard form to his own
In accordance with the NVT standard, the <CRLF> sequence
should be used where necessary to denote the end of a line
of text.  (See the discussion of file structure at the end
of the Section on Data Representation and Storage.)
Using the standard NVT-ASCII representation means that data
must be interpreted as 8-bit bytes.
The Format parameter for ASCII and EBCDIC types is discussed
This type is intended for efficient transfer between hosts
which use EBCDIC for their internal character
For transmission, the data are represented as 8-bit EBCDIC
characters.  The character code is the only difference
between the functional specifications of EBCDIC and ASCII
End-of-line (as opposed to end-of-record--see the discussion
of structure) will probably be rarely used with EBCDIC type
for purposes of denoting structure, but where it is
necessary the <NL> character should be used.
The data are sent as contiguous bits which, for transfer,
are packed into the 8-bit transfer bytes.  The receiving
site must store the data as contiguous bits.  The structure
of the storage system might necessitate the padding of the
file (or of each record, for a record-structured file) to
some convenient boundary (byte, word or block).  This
padding, which must be all zeros, may occur only at the end
of the file (or at the end of each record) and there must be
a way of identifying the padding bits so that they may be
stripped off if the file is retrieved.  The padding
transformation should be well publicized to enable a user to
process a file at the storage site.
Image type is intended for the efficient storage and
retrieval of files and for the transfer of binary data.  It
is recommended that this type be accepted by all FTP
The data is transferred in logical bytes of the size
specified by the obligatory second parameter, Byte size.
The value of Byte size must be a decimal integer; there is
no default value.  The logical byte size is not necessarily
the same as the transfer byte size.  If there is a
difference in byte sizes, then the logical bytes should be
packed contiguously, disregarding transfer byte boundaries
and with any necessary padding at the end.
When the data reaches the receiving host, it will be
transformed in a manner dependent on the logical byte size
and the particular host.  This transformation must be
invertible (i.e., an identical file can be retrieved if the
same parameters are used) and should be well publicized by
For example, a user sending 36-bit floating-point numbers to
a host with a 32-bit word could send that data as Local byte
with a logical byte size of 36.  The receiving host would
then be expected to store the logical bytes so that they
could be easily manipulated; in this example putting the
36-bit logical bytes into 64-bit double words should
In another example, a pair of hosts with a 36-bit word size
may send data to one another in words by using TYPE L 36.
The data would be sent in the 8-bit transmission bytes
packed so that 9 transmission bytes carried two host words.
The types ASCII and EBCDIC also take a second (optional)
parameter; this is to indicate what kind of vertical format
control, if any, is associated with a file.  The following
data representation types are defined in FTP:
A character file may be transferred to a host for one of
three purposes: for printing, for storage and later
retrieval, or for processing.  If a file is sent for
printing, the receiving host must know how the vertical
format control is represented.  In the second case, it must
be possible to store a file at a host and then retrieve it
later in exactly the same form.  Finally, it should be
possible to move a file from one host to another and process
the file at the second host without undue trouble.  A single
ASCII or EBCDIC format does not satisfy all these
conditions.  Therefore, these types have a second parameter
specifying one of the following three formats:
This is the default format to be used if the second
(format) parameter is omitted.  Non-print format must be
accepted by all FTP implementations.
The file need contain no vertical format information.  If
it is passed to a printer process, this process may
assume standard values for spacing and margins.
Normally, this format will be used with files destined
for processing or just storage.
The file contains ASCII/EBCDIC vertical format controls
process will interpret appropriately.  <CRLF>, in exactly
this sequence, also denotes end-of-line.
The file contains ASA (FORTRAN) vertical format control
characters.  (See RFC 740 Appendix C; and Communications
line or a record formatted according to the ASA Standard,
the first character is not to be printed.  Instead, it
should be used to determine the vertical movement of the
paper which should take place before the rest of the
The ASA Standard specifies the following control
Clearly there must be some way for a printer process to
distinguish the end of the structural entity.  If a file
has record structure (see below) this is no problem;
records will be explicitly marked during transfer and
storage.  If the file has no record structure, the <CRLF>
end-of-line sequence is used to separate printing lines,
but these format effectors are overridden by the ASA
In addition to different representation types, FTP allows the
structure of a file to be specified.  Three file structures are
file-structure,     where there is no internal structure and
record-structure,   where the file is made up of sequential
and page-structure, where the file is made up of independent
File-structure is the default to be assumed if the STRUcture
command has not been used but both file and record structures
must be accepted for "text" files (i.e., files with TYPE ASCII
or EBCDIC) by all FTP implementations.  The structure of a file
will affect both the transfer mode of a file (see the Section
on Transmission Modes) and the interpretation and storage of
The "natural" structure of a file will depend on which host
stores the file.  A source-code file will usually be stored on
an IBM Mainframe in fixed length records but on a DEC TOPS-20
as a stream of characters partitioned into lines, for example
by <CRLF>.  If the transfer of files between such disparate
sites is to be useful, there must be some way for one site to
recognize the other's assumptions about the file.
With some sites being naturally file-oriented and others
naturally record-oriented there may be problems if a file with
one structure is sent to a host oriented to the other.  If a
text file is sent with record-structure to a host which is file
oriented, then that host should apply an internal
transformation to the file based on the record structure.
Obviously, this transformation should be useful, but it must
also be invertible so that an identical file may be retrieved
using record structure.
In the case of a file being sent with file-structure to a
record-oriented host, there exists the question of what
criteria the host should use to divide the file into records
which can be processed locally.  If this division is necessary,
the FTP implementation should use the end-of-line sequence,
<CRLF> for ASCII, or <NL> for EBCDIC text files, as the
delimiter.  If an FTP implementation adopts this technique, it
must be prepared to reverse the transformation if the file is
retrieved with file-structure.
File structure is the default to be assumed if the STRUcture
command has not been used.
In file-structure there is no internal structure and the
file is considered to be a continuous sequence of data
Record structures must be accepted for "text" files (i.e.,
files with TYPE ASCII or EBCDIC) by all FTP implementations.
In record-structure the file is made up of sequential
To transmit files that are discontinuous, FTP defines a page
structure.  Files of this type are sometimes known as
"random access files" or even as "holey files".  In these
files there is sometimes other information associated with
the file as a whole (e.g., a file descriptor), or with a
section of the file (e.g., page access controls), or both.
In FTP, the sections of the file are called pages.
To provide for various page sizes and associated
information, each page is sent with a page header.  The page
header has the following defined fields:
The number of logical bytes in the page header
including this byte.  The minimum header length is 4.
The logical page number of this section of the file.
This is not the transmission sequence number of this
page, but the index used to identify this page of the
The number of logical bytes in the page data.  The
The type of page this is.  The following page types
structured transmission.  The header length must
This type is used to transmit the descriptive
This type includes an additional header field
for paged files with page level access control
Further header fields may be used to supply per page
control information, for example, per page access
All fields are one logical byte in length.  The logical byte
size is specified by the TYPE command.  See Appendix I for
further details and a specific case at the page structure.
A note of caution about parameters:  a file must be stored and
retrieved with the same parameters if the retrieved version is to
be identical to the version originally transmitted.  Conversely,
FTP implementations must return a file identical to the original
if the parameters used to store and retrieve a file are the same.
The mechanics of transferring data consists of setting up the data
connection to the appropriate ports and choosing the parameters
for transfer.  Both the user and the server-DTPs have a default
data port.  The user-process default data port is the same as the
control connection port (i.e., U).  The server-process default
data port is the port adjacent to the control connection port
The transfer byte size is 8-bit bytes.  This byte size is relevant
only for the actual transfer of the data; it has no bearing on
representation of the data within a host's file system.
The passive data transfer process (this may be a user-DTP or a
second server-DTP) shall "listen" on the data port prior to
sending a transfer request command.  The FTP request command
determines the direction of the data transfer.  The server, upon
receiving the transfer request, will initiate the data connection
to the port.  When the connection is established, the data
transfer begins between DTP's, and the server-PI sends a
confirming reply to the user-PI.
Every FTP implementation must support the use of the default data
ports, and only the USER-PI can initiate a change to non-default
It is possible for the user to specify an alternate data port by
use of the PORT command.  The user may want a file dumped on a TAC
line printer or retrieved from a third party host.  In the latter
case, the user-PI sets up control connections with both
server-PI's.  One server is then told (by an FTP command) to
"listen" for a connection which the other will initiate.  The
user-PI sends one server-PI a PORT command indicating the data
port of the other.  Finally, both are sent the appropriate
transfer commands.  The exact sequence of commands and replies
sent between the user-controller and the servers is defined in the
In general, it is the server's responsibility to maintain the data
connection--to initiate it and to close it.  The exception to this
is when the user-DTP is sending the data in a transfer mode that
requires the connection to be closed to indicate EOF.  The server
MUST close the data connection under the following conditions:
that requires a close to indicate EOF.
Otherwise the close is a server option, the exercise of which the
server must indicate to the user-process by either a 250 or 226
Default Data Connection Ports:  All FTP implementations must
support use of the default data connection ports, and only the
User-PI may initiate the use of non-default ports.
Negotiating Non-Default Data Ports:   The User-PI may specify a
non-default user side data port with the PORT command.  The
User-PI may request the server side to identify a non-default
server side data port with the PASV command.  Since a connection
is defined by the pair of addresses, either of these actions is
enough to get a different data connection, still it is permitted
to do both commands to use new ports on both ends of the data
Reuse of the Data Connection:  When using the stream mode of data
transfer the end of the file must be indicated by closing the
connection.  This causes a problem if multiple files are to be
transfered in the session, due to need for TCP to hold the
connection record for a time out period to guarantee the reliable
communication.  Thus the connection can not be reopened at once.
There are two solutions to this problem.  The first is to
negotiate a non-default port.  The second is to use another
A comment on transfer modes.  The stream transfer mode is
inherently unreliable, since one can not determine if the
connection closed prematurely or not.  The other transfer modes
(Block, Compressed) do not close the connection to indicate the
end of file.  They have enough FTP encoding that the data
connection can be parsed to determine the end of the file.
Thus using these modes one can leave the data connection open
for multiple file transfers.
The next consideration in transferring data is choosing the
appropriate transmission mode.  There are three modes: one which
formats the data and allows for restart procedures; one which also
compresses the data for efficient transfer; and one which passes
the data with little or no processing.  In this last case the mode
interacts with the structure attribute to determine the type of
processing.  In the compressed mode, the representation type
determines the filler byte.
All data transfers must be completed with an end-of-file (EOF)
which may be explicitly stated or implied by the closing of the
data connection.  For files with record structure, all the
end-of-record markers (EOR) are explicit, including the final one.
For files transmitted in page structure a "last-page" page type is
NOTE:  In the rest of this section, byte means "transfer byte"
except where explicitly stated otherwise.
For the purpose of standardized transfer, the sending host will
translate its internal end of line or end of record denotation
into the representation prescribed by the transfer mode and file
structure, and the receiving host will perform the inverse
translation to its internal denotation.  An IBM Mainframe record
count field may not be recognized at another host, so the
end-of-record information may be transferred as a two byte control
code in Stream mode or as a flagged bit in a Block or Compressed
mode descriptor.  End-of-line in an ASCII or EBCDIC file with no
record structure should be indicated by <CRLF> or <NL>,
respectively.  Since these transformations imply extra work for
some systems, identical systems transferring non-record structured
text files might wish to use a binary representation and stream
The following transmission modes are defined in FTP:
The data is transmitted as a stream of bytes.  There is no
restriction on the representation type used; record structures
In a record structured file EOR and EOF will each be indicated
by a two-byte control code.  The first byte of the control code
will be all ones, the escape character.  The second byte will
have the low order bit on and zeros elsewhere for EOR and the
second low order bit on for EOF; that is, the byte will have
value 1 for EOR and value 2 for EOF.  EOR and EOF may be
indicated together on the last byte transmitted by turning both
low order bits on (i.e., the value 3).  If a byte of all ones
was intended to be sent as data, it should be repeated in the
second byte of the control code.
If the structure is a file structure, the EOF is indicated by
the sending host closing the data connection and all bytes are
The file is transmitted as a series of data blocks preceded by
one or more header bytes.  The header bytes contain a count
field, and descriptor code.  The count field indicates the
total length of the data block in bytes, thus marking the
beginning of the next data block (there are no filler bits).
The descriptor code defines:  last block in the file (EOF) last
block in the record (EOR), restart marker (see the Section on
Error Recovery and Restart) or suspect data (i.e., the data
being transferred is suspected of errors and is not reliable).
This last code is NOT intended for error control within FTP.
It is motivated by the desire of sites exchanging certain types
of data (e.g., seismic or weather data) to send and receive all
the data despite local errors (such as "magnetic tape read
errors"), but to indicate in the transmission that certain
portions are suspect).  Record structures are allowed in this
mode, and any representation type may be used.
The header consists of the three bytes.  Of the 24 bits of
header information, the 16 low order bits shall represent byte
count, and the 8 high order bits shall represent descriptor
The descriptor codes are indicated by bit flags in the
descriptor byte.  Four codes have been assigned, where each
code number is the decimal value of the corresponding bit in
With this encoding, more than one descriptor coded condition
may exist for a particular block.  As many bits as necessary
The restart marker is embedded in the data stream as an
integral number of 8-bit bytes representing printable
characters in the language being used over the control
connection (e.g., default--NVT-ASCII).  <SP> (Space, in the
appropriate language) must not be used WITHIN a restart marker.
For example, to transmit a six-character marker, the following
There are three kinds of information to be sent:  regular data,
sent in a byte string; compressed data, consisting of
replications or filler; and control information, sent in a
two-byte escape sequence.  If n>0 bytes (up to 127) of regular
data are sent, these n bytes are preceded by a byte with the
left-most bit set to 0 and the right-most 7 bits containing the
To compress a string of n replications of the data byte d, the
following 2 bytes are sent:
A string of n filler bytes can be compressed into a single
byte, where the filler byte varies with the representation
type.  If the type is ASCII or EBCDIC the filler byte is <SP>
(Space, ASCII code 32, EBCDIC code 64).  If the type is Image
or Local byte the filler is a zero byte.
The escape sequence is a double byte, the first of which is the
escape byte (all zeros) and the second of which contains
descriptor codes as defined in Block mode.  The descriptor
codes have the same meaning as in Block mode and apply to the
succeeding string of bytes.
Compressed mode is useful for obtaining increased bandwidth on
very large network transmissions at a little extra CPU cost.
It can be most effectively used to reduce the size of printer
files such as those generated by RJE hosts.
There is no provision for detecting bits lost or scrambled in data
transfer; this level of error control is handled by the TCP.
However, a restart procedure is provided to protect users from
gross system failures (including failures of a host, an
FTP-process, or the underlying network).
The restart procedure is defined only for the block and compressed
modes of data transfer.  It requires the sender of data to insert
a special marker code in the data stream with some marker
information.  The marker information has meaning only to the
sender, but must consist of printable characters in the default or
negotiated language of the control connection (ASCII or EBCDIC).
The marker could represent a bit-count, a record-count, or any
other information by which a system may identify a data
checkpoint.  The receiver of data, if it implements the restart
procedure, would then mark the corresponding position of this
marker in the receiving system, and return this information to the
In the event of a system failure, the user can restart the data
transfer by identifying the marker point with the FTP restart
procedure.  The following example illustrates the use of the
The sender of the data inserts an appropriate marker block in the
data stream at a convenient point.  The receiving host marks the
corresponding data point in its file system and conveys the last
known sender and receiver marker information to the user, either
directly or over the control connection in a 110 reply (depending
on who is the sender).  In the event of a system failure, the user
or controller process restarts the server at the last server
marker by sending a restart command with server's marker code as
its argument.  The restart command is transmitted over the control
connection and is immediately followed by the command (such as
RETR, STOR or LIST) which was being executed when the system
The communication channel from the user-PI to the server-PI is
established as a TCP connection from the user to the standard server
port.  The user protocol interpreter is responsible for sending FTP
commands and interpreting the replies received; the server-PI
interprets commands, sends replies and directs its DTP to set up the
data connection and transfer the data.  If the second party to the
data transfer (the passive transfer process) is the user-DTP, then it
is governed through the internal protocol of the user-FTP host; if it
is a second server-DTP, then it is governed by its PI on command from
the user-PI.  The FTP replies are discussed in the next section.  In
the description of a few of the commands in this section, it is
helpful to be explicit about the possible replies.
The following commands specify access control identifiers
(command codes are shown in parentheses).
The argument field is a Telnet string identifying the user.
The user identification is that which is required by the
server for access to its file system.  This command will
normally be the first command transmitted by the user after
the control connections are made (some servers may require
this).  Additional identification information in the form of
a password and/or an account command may also be required by
some servers.  Servers may allow a new USER command to be
entered at any point in order to change the access control
and/or accounting information.  This has the effect of
flushing any user, password, and account information already
supplied and beginning the login sequence again.  All
transfer parameters are unchanged and any file transfer in
progress is completed under the old access control
The argument field is a Telnet string specifying the user's
password.  This command must be immediately preceded by the
user name command, and, for some sites, completes the user's
identification for access control.  Since password
information is quite sensitive, it is desirable in general
to "mask" it or suppress typeout.  It appears that the
server has no foolproof way to achieve this.  It is
therefore the responsibility of the user-FTP process to hide
the sensitive password information.
The argument field is a Telnet string identifying the user's
account.  The command is not necessarily related to the USER
command, as some sites may require an account for login and
others only for specific access, such as storing files.  In
the latter case the command may arrive at any time.
There are reply codes to differentiate these cases for the
automation: when account information is required for login,
the response to a successful PASSword command is reply code
required for login, the reply to a successful PASSword
command is 230; and if the account information is needed for
a command issued later in the dialogue, the server should
return a 332 or 532 reply depending on whether it stores
(pending receipt of the ACCounT command) or discards the
CHANGE WORKING DIRECTORY (CWD)
This command allows the user to work with a different
directory or dataset for file storage or retrieval without
altering his login or accounting information.  Transfer
parameters are similarly unchanged.  The argument is a
pathname specifying a directory or other system dependent
CHANGE TO PARENT DIRECTORY (CDUP)
This command is a special case of CWD, and is included to
simplify the implementation of programs for transferring
directory trees between operating systems having different
syntaxes for naming the parent directory.  The reply codes
shall be identical to the reply codes of CWD.  See
Appendix II for further details.
This command allows the user to mount a different file
system data structure without altering his login or
accounting information.  Transfer parameters are similarly
unchanged.  The argument is a pathname specifying a
directory or other system dependent file group designator.
This command terminates a USER, flushing all I/O and account
information, except to allow any transfer in progress to be
completed.  All parameters are reset to the default settings
and the control connection is left open.  This is identical
to the state in which a user finds himself immediately after
the control connection is opened.  A USER command may be
This command terminates a USER and if file transfer is not
in progress, the server closes the control connection.  If
file transfer is in progress, the connection will remain
open for result response and the server will then close it.
If the user-process is transferring files for several USERs
but does not wish to close and then reopen connections for
each, then the REIN command should be used instead of QUIT.
An unexpected close on the control connection will cause the
server to take the effective action of an abort (ABOR) and a
All data transfer parameters have default values, and the
commands specifying data transfer parameters are required only
if the default parameter values are to be changed.  The default
value is the last specified value, or if no value has been
specified, the standard default value is as stated here.  This
implies that the server must "remember" the applicable default
values.  The commands may be in any order except that they must
precede the FTP service request.  The following commands
specify data transfer parameters:
The argument is a HOST-PORT specification for the data port
to be used in data connection.  There are defaults for both
the user and server data ports, and under normal
circumstances this command and its reply are not needed.  If
this command is used, the argument is the concatenation of a
32-bit internet host address and a 16-bit TCP port address.
This address information is broken into 8-bit fields and the
value of each field is transmitted as a decimal number (in
character string representation).  The fields are separated
by commas.  A port command would be:
where h1 is the high order 8 bits of the internet host
This command requests the server-DTP to "listen" on a data
port (which is not its default data port) and to wait for a
connection rather than initiate one upon receipt of a
transfer command.  The response to this command includes the
host and port address this server is listening on.
REPRESENTATION TYPE (TYPE)
The argument specifies the representation type as described
in the Section on Data Representation and Storage.  Several
types take a second parameter.  The first parameter is
denoted by a single Telnet character, as is the second
Format parameter for ASCII and EBCDIC; the second parameter
for local byte is a decimal integer to indicate Bytesize.
The parameters are separated by a <SP> (Space, ASCII code
The following codes are assigned for type:
The default representation type is ASCII Non-print.  If the
Format parameter is changed, and later just the first
argument is changed, Format then returns to the Non-print
The argument is a single Telnet character code specifying
file structure described in the Section on Data
Representation and Storage.
The following codes are assigned for structure:
The default structure is File.
the data transfer modes described in the Section on
The following codes are assigned for transfer modes:
The default transfer mode is Stream.
The FTP service commands define the file transfer or the file
system function requested by the user.  The argument of an FTP
service command will normally be a pathname.  The syntax of
pathnames must conform to server site conventions (with
standard defaults applicable), and the language conventions of
the control connection.  The suggested default handling is to
use the last specified device, directory or file name, or the
standard default defined for local users.  The commands may be
in any order except that a "rename from" command must be
followed by a "rename to" command and the restart command must
be followed by the interrupted service command (e.g., STOR or
RETR).  The data, when transferred in response to FTP service
commands, shall always be sent over the data connection, except
for certain informative replies.  The following commands
specify FTP service requests:
This command causes the server-DTP to transfer a copy of the
file, specified in the pathname, to the server- or user-DTP
at the other end of the data connection.  The status and
contents of the file at the server site shall be unaffected.
This command causes the server-DTP to accept the data
transferred via the data connection and to store the data as
a file at the server site.  If the file specified in the
pathname exists at the server site, then its contents shall
be replaced by the data being transferred.  A new file is
created at the server site if the file specified in the
pathname does not already exist.
This command behaves like STOR except that the resultant
file is to be created in the current directory under a name
unique to that directory.  The 250 Transfer Started response
must include the name generated.
APPEND (with create) (APPE)
transferred via the data connection and to store the data in
pathname exists at the server site, then the data shall be
appended to that file; otherwise the file specified in the
pathname shall be created at the server site.
This command may be required by some servers to reserve
sufficient storage to accommodate the new file to be
transferred.  The argument shall be a decimal integer
representing the number of bytes (using the logical byte
size) of storage to be reserved for the file.  For files
sent with record or page structure a maximum record or page
size (in logical bytes) might also be necessary; this is
indicated by a decimal integer in a second argument field of
the command.  This second argument is optional, but when
present should be separated from the first by the three
Telnet characters <SP> R <SP>.  This command shall be
followed by a STORe or APPEnd command.  The ALLO command
should be treated as a NOOP (no operation) by those servers
which do not require that the maximum size of the file be
declared beforehand, and those servers interested in only
the maximum record or page size should accept a dummy value
in the first argument and ignore it.
The argument field represents the server marker at which
file transfer is to be restarted.  This command does not
cause file transfer but skips over the file to the specified
data checkpoint.  This command shall be immediately followed
by the appropriate FTP service command which shall cause
file transfer to resume.
This command specifies the old pathname of the file which is
to be renamed.  This command must be immediately followed by
a "rename to" command specifying the new file pathname.
This command specifies the new pathname of the file
specified in the immediately preceding "rename from"
command.  Together the two commands cause a file to be
This command tells the server to abort the previous FTP
service command and any associated transfer of data.  The
abort command may require "special action", as discussed in
the Section on FTP Commands, to force recognition by the
server.  No action is to be taken if the previous command
has been completed (including data transfer).  The control
connection is not to be closed by the server, but the data
connection must be closed.
There are two cases for the server upon receipt of this
command: (1) the FTP service command was already completed,
or (2) the FTP service command is still in progress.
In the first case, the server closes the data connection
(if it is open) and responds with a 226 reply, indicating
that the abort command was successfully processed.
In the second case, the server aborts the FTP service in
progress and closes the data connection, returning a 426
reply to indicate that the service request terminated
indicating that the abort command was successfully
This command causes the file specified in the pathname to be
deleted at the server site.  If an extra level of protection
is desired (such as the query, "Do you really wish to
delete?"), it should be provided by the user-FTP process.
This command causes the directory specified in the pathname
to be removed as a directory (if the pathname is absolute)
or as a subdirectory of the current working directory (if
the pathname is relative).  See Appendix II.
to be created as a directory (if the pathname is absolute)
PRINT WORKING DIRECTORY (PWD)
This command causes the name of the current working
directory to be returned in the reply.  See Appendix II.
This command causes a list to be sent from the server to the
passive DTP.  If the pathname specifies a directory or other
group of files, the server should transfer a list of files
in the specified directory.  If the pathname specifies a
file then the server should send current information on the
file.  A null argument implies the user's current working or
default directory.  The data transfer is over the data
connection in type ASCII or type EBCDIC.  (The user must
ensure that the TYPE is appropriately ASCII or EBCDIC).
Since the information on a file may vary widely from system
to system, this information may be hard to use automatically
in a program, but may be quite useful to a human user.
This command causes a directory listing to be sent from
server to user site.  The pathname should specify a
directory or other system-specific file group descriptor; a
null argument implies the current directory.  The server
will return a stream of names of files and no other
information.  The data will be transferred in ASCII or
EBCDIC type over the data connection as valid pathname
strings separated by <CRLF> or <NL>.  (Again the user must
ensure that the TYPE is correct.)  This command is intended
to return information that can be used by a program to
further process the files automatically.  For example, in
the implementation of a "multiple get" function.
This command is used by the server to provide services
specific to his system that are essential to file transfer
but not sufficiently universal to be included as commands in
the protocol.  The nature of these services and the
specification of their syntax can be stated in a reply to
This command is used to find out the type of operating
system at the server.  The reply shall have as its first
word one of the system names listed in the current version
of the Assigned Numbers document [4].
This command shall cause a status response to be sent over
the control connection in the form of a reply.  The command
may be sent during a file transfer (along with the Telnet IP
and Synch signals--see the Section on FTP Commands) in which
case the server will respond with the status of the
operation in progress, or it may be sent between file
transfers.  In the latter case, the command may have an
argument field.  If the argument is a pathname, the command
is analogous to the "list" command except that data shall be
transferred over the control connection.  If a partial
pathname is given, the server may respond with a list of
file names or attributes associated with that specification.
If no argument is given, the server should return general
status information about the server FTP process.  This
should include current values of all transfer parameters and
the status of connections.
This command shall cause the server to send helpful
information regarding its implementation status over the
control connection to the user.  The command may take an
argument (e.g., any command name) and return more specific
information as a response.  The reply is type 211 or 214.
It is suggested that HELP be allowed before entering a USER
command. The server may use this reply to specify
site-dependent parameters, e.g., in response to HELP SITE.
This command does not affect any parameters or previously
entered commands. It specifies no action other than that the
The File Transfer Protocol follows the specifications of the Telnet
protocol for all communications over the control connection.  Since
the language used for Telnet communication may be a negotiated
option, all references in the next two sections will be to the
"Telnet language" and the corresponding "Telnet end-of-line code".
Currently, one may take these to mean NVT-ASCII and <CRLF>.  No other
specifications of the Telnet protocol will be cited.
FTP commands are "Telnet strings" terminated by the "Telnet end of
line code".  The command codes themselves are alphabetic characters
terminated by the character <SP> (Space) if parameters follow and
Telnet-EOL otherwise.  The command codes and the semantics of
commands are described in this section; the detailed syntax of
commands is specified in the Section on Commands, the reply sequences
are discussed in the Section on Sequencing of Commands and Replies,
and scenarios illustrating the use of commands are provided in the
Section on Typical FTP Scenarios.
FTP commands may be partitioned as those specifying access-control
identifiers, data transfer parameters, or FTP service requests.
Certain commands (such as ABOR, STAT, QUIT) may be sent over the
control connection while a data transfer is in progress.  Some
servers may not be able to monitor the control and data connections
simultaneously, in which case some special action will be necessary
to get the server's attention.  The following ordered format is
tentatively recommended:
EXACTLY ONE FTP command.
(For other servers this may not be necessary but the actions listed
above should have no unusual effect.)
Replies to File Transfer Protocol commands are devised to ensure
the synchronization of requests and actions in the process of file
transfer, and to guarantee that the user process always knows the
state of the Server.  Every command must generate at least one
reply, although there may be more than one; in the latter case,
the multiple replies must be easily distinguished.  In addition,
some commands occur in sequential groups, such as USER, PASS and
ACCT, or RNFR and RNTO.  The replies show the existence of an
intermediate state if all preceding commands have been successful.
A failure at any point in the sequence necessitates the repetition
of the entire sequence from the beginning.
The details of the command-reply sequence are made explicit in
a set of state diagrams below.
An FTP reply consists of a three digit number (transmitted as
three alphanumeric characters) followed by some text.  The number
is intended for use by automata to determine what state to enter
next; the text is intended for the human user.  It is intended
that the three digits contain enough encoded information that the
user-process (the User-PI) will not need to examine the text and
may either discard it or pass it on to the user, as appropriate.
In particular, the text may be server-dependent, so there are
likely to be varying texts for each reply code.
A reply is defined to contain the 3-digit code, followed by Space
<SP>, followed by one line of text (where some maximum line length
has been specified), and terminated by the Telnet end-of-line
code.  There will be cases however, where the text is longer than
a single line.  In these cases the complete text must be bracketed
so the User-process knows when it may stop reading the reply (i.e.
stop processing input on the control connection) and go do other
things.  This requires a special format on the first line to
indicate that more than one line is coming, and another on the
last line to designate it as the last.  At least one of these must
contain the appropriate reply code to indicate the state of the
transaction.  To satisfy all factions, it was decided that both
the first and last line codes should be the same.
Thus the format for multi-line replies is that the first line
will begin with the exact required reply code, followed
immediately by a Hyphen, "-" (also known as Minus), followed by
text.  The last line will begin with the same code, followed
immediately by Space <SP>, optionally some text, and the Telnet
The user-process then simply needs to search for the second
occurrence of the same reply code, followed by <SP> (Space), at
the beginning of a line, and ignore all intermediary lines.  If
an intermediary line begins with a 3-digit number, the Server
must pad the front  to avoid confusion.
This scheme allows standard system routines to be used for
reply information (such as for the STAT reply), with
"artificial" first and last lines tacked on.  In rare cases
where these routines are able to generate three digits and a
Space at the beginning of any line, the beginning of each
text line should be offset by some neutral text, like Space.
This scheme assumes that multi-line replies may not be nested.
The three digits of the reply each have a special significance.
This is intended to allow a range of very simple to very
sophisticated responses by the user-process.  The first digit
denotes whether the response is good, bad or incomplete.
(Referring to the state diagram), an unsophisticated user-process
will be able to determine its next action (proceed as planned,
redo, retrench, etc.) by simply examining this first digit.  A
user-process that wants to know approximately what kind of error
occurred (e.g. file system error, command syntax error) may
examine the second digit, reserving the third digit for the finest
gradation of information (e.g., RNTO command without a preceding
There are five values for the first digit of the reply code:
1yz   Positive Preliminary reply
The requested action is being initiated; expect another
reply before proceeding with a new command.  (The
user-process sending another command before the
completion reply would be in violation of protocol; but
server-FTP processes should queue any commands that
arrive while a preceding command is in progress.)  This
type of reply can be used to indicate that the command
was accepted and the user-process may now pay attention
to the data connections, for implementations where
simultaneous monitoring is difficult.  The server-FTP
process may send at most, one 1yz reply per command.
2yz   Positive Completion reply
The requested action has been successfully completed.  A
3yz   Positive Intermediate reply
The command has been accepted, but the requested action
is being held in abeyance, pending receipt of further
information.  The user should send another command
specifying this information.  This reply is used in
4yz   Transient Negative Completion reply
The command was not accepted and the requested action did
not take place, but the error condition is temporary and
the action may be requested again.  The user should
return to the beginning of the command sequence, if any.
It is difficult to assign a meaning to "transient",
particularly when two distinct sites (Server- and
User-processes) have to agree on the interpretation.
Each reply in the 4yz category might have a slightly
different time value, but the intent is that the
user-process is encouraged to try again.  A rule of thumb
in determining if a reply fits into the 4yz or the 5yz
(Permanent Negative) category is that replies are 4yz if
the commands can be repeated without any change in
command form or in properties of the User or Server
(e.g., the command is spelled the same with the same
arguments used; the user does not change his file access
or user name; the server does not put up a new
5yz   Permanent Negative Completion reply
not take place.  The User-process is discouraged from
repeating the exact request (in the same sequence).  Even
some "permanent" error conditions can be corrected, so
the human user may want to direct his User-process to
reinitiate the command sequence by direct action at some
point in the future (e.g., after the spelling has been
changed, or the user has altered his directory status.)
The following function groupings are encoded in the second
x0z   Syntax - These replies refer to syntax errors,
syntactically correct commands that don't fit any
functional category, unimplemented or superfluous
x1z   Information -  These are replies to requests for
x2z   Connections - Replies referring to the control and
x3z   Authentication and accounting - Replies for the login
process and accounting procedures.
x5z   File system - These replies indicate the status of the
Server file system vis-a-vis the requested transfer or
The third digit gives a finer gradation of meaning in each of
the function categories, specified by the second digit.  The
list of replies below will illustrate this.  Note that the text
associated with each reply is recommended, rather than
mandatory, and may even change according to the command with
which it is associated.  The reply codes, on the other hand,
must strictly follow the specifications in the last section;
that is, Server implementations should not invent new codes for
situations that are only slightly different from the ones
described here, but rather should adapt codes already defined.
A command such as TYPE or ALLO whose successful execution
does not offer the user-process any new information will
cause a 200 reply to be returned.  If the command is not
implemented by a particular Server-FTP process because it
has no relevance to that computer system, for example ALLO
at a TOPS20 site, a Positive Completion reply is still
desired so that the simple User-process knows it can proceed
with its course of action.  A 202 reply is used in this case
with, for example, the reply text:  "No storage allocation
necessary."  If, on the other hand, the command requests a
non-site-specific action and is unimplemented, the response
is 502.  A refinement of that is the 504 reply for a command
that is implemented, but that requests an unimplemented
This may include errors such as command line too long.
In this case, the text is exact and not left to the
particular implementation; it must read:
Where yyyy is User-process data stream marker, and mmmm
server's equivalent marker (note the spaces between markers
On how to use the server or the meaning of a particular
non-standard command.  This reply is useful only to the
Where NAME is an official system name from the list in the
Assigned Numbers document.
Logged out if appropriate.
This may be a reply to any command if the service knows it
Requested file action successful (for example, file
File unavailable (e.g., file not found, no access).
Insufficient storage space in system.
Exceeded storage allocation (for current directory or
In order to make FTP workable without needless error messages, the
following minimum implementation is required for all servers:
The default values for transfer parameters are:
All hosts must accept the above as the standard defaults.
The server protocol interpreter shall "listen" on Port L.  The
user or user protocol interpreter shall initiate the full-duplex
control connection.  Server- and user- processes should follow the
conventions of the Telnet protocol as specified in the
ARPA-Internet Protocol Handbook [1].  Servers are under no
obligation to provide for editing of command lines and may require
that it be done in the user host.  The control connection shall be
closed by the server at the user's request after all transfers and
The user-DTP must "listen" on the specified data port; this may be
the default user port (U) or a port specified in the PORT command.
The server shall initiate the data connection from his own default
data port (L-1) using the specified user data port.  The direction
of the transfer and the port used will be determined by the FTP
Note that all FTP implementation must support data transfer using
the default port, and that only the USER-PI may initiate the use
When data is to be transferred between two servers, A and B (refer
to Figure 2), the user-PI, C, sets up control connections with
both server-PI's.  One of the servers, say A, is then sent a PASV
command telling him to "listen" on his data port rather than
initiate a connection when he receives a transfer service command.
When the user-PI receives an acknowledgment to the PASV command,
which includes the identity of the host and port being listened
on, the user-PI then sends A's port, a, to B in a PORT command; a
reply is returned.  The user-PI may then send the corresponding
service commands to A and B.  Server B initiates the connection
and the transfer proceeds.  The command-reply sequence is listed
below where the messages are vertically synchronous but
horizontally asynchronous:
The data connection shall be closed by the server under the
conditions described in the Section on Establishing Data
Connections.  If the data connection is to be closed following a
data transfer where closing the connection is not required to
indicate the end-of-file, the server must do so immediately.
Waiting until after a new transfer command is not permitted
because the user-process will have already tested the data
connection to see if it needs to do a "listen"; (remember that the
user must "listen" on a closed data port BEFORE sending the
transfer request).  To prevent a race condition here, the server
sends a reply (226) after closing the data connection (or if the
connection is left open, a "file transfer completed" reply (250)
and the user-PI should wait for one of these replies before
issuing a new transfer command).
Any time either the user or server see that the connection is
being closed by the other side, it should promptly read any
remaining data queued on the connection and issue the close on its
The commands are Telnet character strings transmitted over the
control connections as described in the Section on FTP Commands.
The command functions and semantics are described in the Section
on Access Control Commands, Transfer Parameter Commands, FTP
Service Commands, and Miscellaneous Commands.  The command syntax
The commands begin with a command code followed by an argument
field.  The command codes are four or fewer alphabetic characters.
Upper and lower case alphabetic characters are to be treated
identically.  Thus, any of the following may represent the
This also applies to any symbols representing parameter values,
such as A or a for ASCII TYPE.  The command codes and the argument
fields are separated by one or more spaces.
The argument field consists of a variable length character string
ending with the character sequence <CRLF> (Carriage Return, Line
Feed) for NVT-ASCII representation; for other negotiated languages
a different end of line character might be used.  It should be
noted that the server is to take no action until the end of line
The syntax is specified below in NVT-ASCII.  All characters in the
argument field are ASCII characters including any ASCII
represented decimal integers.  Square brackets denote an optional
argument field.  If the option is not taken, the appropriate
The following are the FTP commands:
ACCT <SP> <account-information> <CRLF>
The syntax of the above argument fields (using BNF notation
<decimal-integer> ::= any decimal integer
The communication between the user and server is intended to be an
alternating dialogue.  As such, the user issues an FTP command and
the server responds with a prompt primary reply.  The user should
wait for this initial primary success or failure response before
sending further commands.
Certain commands require a second reply for which the user should
also wait.  These replies may, for example, report on the progress
or completion of file transfer or the closing of the data
connection.  They are secondary replies to file transfer commands.
One important group of informational replies is the connection
greetings.  Under normal circumstances, a server will send a 220
reply, "awaiting input", when the connection is completed.  The
user should wait for this greeting message before sending any
commands.  If the server is unable to accept input right away, a
reply when ready.  The user will then know not to hang up if there
Sometimes "the system" spontaneously has a message to be sent
to a user (usually all users).  For example, "System going down
in 15 minutes".  There is no provision in FTP for such
spontaneous information to be sent from the server to the user.
It is recommended that such information be queued in the
server-PI and delivered to the user-PI in the next reply
(possibly making it a multi-line reply).
The table below lists alternative success and failure replies for
each command.  These must be strictly adhered to; a server may
substitute text in the replies, but the meaning and action implied
by the code numbers and by the specific command reply sequence
Command-Reply Sequences
In this section, the command-reply sequence is presented.  Each
command is listed with its possible replies; command groups are
listed together.  Preliminary replies are listed first (with
their succeeding replies indented and under them), then
positive and negative completion, and finally intermediary
replies with the remaining commands from the sequence
following.  This listing forms the basis for the state
diagrams, which will be presented separately.
Connection Establishment
Informational commands
Miscellaneous commands
Here we present state diagrams for a very simple minded FTP
implementation.  Only the first digit of the reply codes is used.
There is one state diagram for each group of FTP commands or command
The command groupings were determined by constructing a model for
each command then collecting together the commands with structurally
For each command or command sequence there are three possible
outcomes: success (S), failure (F), and error (E).  In the state
diagrams below we use the symbol B for "begin", and the symbol W for
We first present the diagram that represents the largest group of FTP
This diagram models the commands:
ABOR, ALLO, DELE, CWD, CDUP, SMNT, HELP, MODE, NOOP, PASV,
QUIT, SITE, PORT, SYST, STAT, RMD, MKD, PWD, STRU, and TYPE.
The other large group of commands is represented by a very similar
APPE, LIST, NLST, REIN, RETR, STOR, and STOU.
Note that this second model could also be used to represent the first
group of commands, the only difference being that in the first group
the 100 series replies are unexpected and therefore treated as error,
while the second group expects (some may require) 100 series replies.
Remember that at most, one 100 series reply is allowed per command.
The remaining diagrams model command sequences, perhaps the simplest
of these is the rename sequence:
The next diagram is a simple model of the Restart command:
We note that the above three models are similar.  The Restart differs
from the Rename two only in the treatment of 100 series replies at
the second stage, while the second group expects (some may require)
The most complicated diagram is for the Login sequence:
Finally, we present a generalized diagram that could be used to model
the command and reply interchange:
User at host U wanting to transfer files to/from host S:
In general, the user will communicate to the server via a mediating
user-FTP process.  The following may be a typical scenario.  The
user-FTP prompts are shown in parentheses, '---->' represents
commands from host U to host S, and '<----' represents replies from
LOCAL COMMANDS BY USER              ACTION INVOLVED
ftp (host) multics<CR>         Connect to host S, port L,
retrieve (local type) ASCII<CR>
(local pathname) test 1 <CR>   User-FTP opens local file in ASCII.
store (local type) image<CR>
(local pathname) file dump<CR> User-FTP opens local file in Image.
The FTP control connection is established via TCP between the user
process port U and the server process port L.  This protocol is
assigned the service port 21 (25 octal), that is L=21.
APPENDIX I -  PAGE STRUCTURE
The need for FTP to support page structure derives principally from
the  need to support efficient transmission of files between TOPS-20
systems, particularly the files used by NLS.
The file system of TOPS-20 is based on the concept of pages.  The
operating system is most efficient at manipulating files as pages.
The operating system provides an interface to the file system so that
many applications view files as sequential streams of characters.
However, a few applications use the underlying page structures
directly, and some of these create holey files.
A TOPS-20 disk file consists of four things: a pathname, a page
table, a (possibly empty) set of pages, and a set of attributes.
The pathname is specified in the RETR or STOR command.  It includes
the directory name, file name, file name extension, and generation
The page table contains up to 2**18 entries.  Each entry may be
EMPTY, or may point to a page.  If it is not empty, there are also
some page-specific access bits; not all pages of a file need have the
same access protection.
A page is a contiguous set of 512 words of 36 bits each.
The attributes of the file, in the File Descriptor Block (FDB),
contain such things as creation time, write time, read time, writer's
byte-size, end-of-file pointer, count of reads and writes, backup
system tape numbers, etc.
Note that there is NO requirement that entries in the page table be
contiguous.  There may be empty page table slots between occupied
ones.  Also, the end of file pointer is simply a number.  There is no
requirement that it in fact point at the "last" datum in the file.
Ordinary sequential I/O calls in TOPS-20 will cause the end of file
pointer to be left after the last datum written, but other operations
may cause it not to be so, if a particular programming system so
In fact, in both of these special cases, "holey" files and
end-of-file pointers NOT at the end of the file, occur with NLS data
The TOPS-20 paged files can be sent with the FTP transfer parameters:
TYPE L 36, STRU P, and MODE S (in fact, any mode could be used).
Each page of information has a header.  Each header field, which is a
logical byte, is a TOPS-20 word, since the TYPE is L 36.
If the data is a disk file page, this is the number of that
page in the file's page map.  Empty pages (holes) in the file
are simply not sent.  Note that a hole is NOT the same as a
The number of data words in this page, following the header.
Thus, the total length of the transmission unit is the Header
Length plus the Data Length.
A code for what type of chunk this is.  A data page is type 3,
Word 4: Page Access Control.
The access bits associated with the page in the file's page
map.  (This full word quantity is put into AC2 of an SPACS by
the program reading from net to disk.)
After the header are Data Length data words.  Data Length is
currently either 512 for a data page or 31 for an FDB.  Trailing
zeros in a disk file page may be discarded, making Data Length less
APPENDIX II -  DIRECTORY COMMANDS
Since UNIX has a tree-like directory structure in which directories
are as easy to manipulate as ordinary files, it is useful to expand
the FTP servers on these machines to include commands which deal with
the creation of directories.  Since there are other hosts on the
ARPA-Internet which have tree-like directories (including TOPS-20 and
Multics), these commands are as general as possible.
Four directory commands have been added to FTP:
Make a directory with the name "pathname".
Remove the directory with the name "pathname".
Print the current working directory name.
Change to the parent of the current working directory.
The  "pathname"  argument should be created (removed) as a
subdirectory of the current working directory, unless the "pathname"
string contains sufficient information to specify otherwise to the
server, e.g., "pathname" is an absolute pathname (in UNIX and
Multics), or pathname is something like "<abso.lute.path>" to
The CDUP command is a special case of CWD, and is included to
simplify the implementation of programs for transferring directory
trees between operating systems having different syntaxes for
naming the parent directory.  The reply codes for CDUP be
identical to the reply codes of CWD.
The reply codes for RMD be identical to the reply codes for its
The reply codes for MKD, however, are a bit more complicated.  A
freshly created directory will probably be the object of a future
CWD command.  Unfortunately, the argument to MKD may not always be
a suitable argument for CWD.  This is the case, for example, when
a TOPS-20 subdirectory is created by giving just the subdirectory
name.  That is, with a TOPS-20 server FTP, the command sequence
will fail.  The new directory may only be referred to by its
"absolute" name; e.g., if the MKD command above were issued while
connected to the directory <DFRANKLIN>, the new subdirectory
could only be referred to by the name <DFRANKLIN.MYDIR>.
Even on UNIX and Multics, however, the argument given to MKD may
not be suitable.  If it is a "relative" pathname (i.e., a pathname
which is interpreted relative to the current directory), the user
would need to be in the same current directory in order to reach
the subdirectory.  Depending on the application, this may be
inconvenient.  It is not very robust in any case.
To solve these problems, upon successful completion of an MKD
command, the server should return a line of the form:
257<space>"<directory-name>"<space><commentary>
That is, the server will tell the user what string to use when
referring to the created  directory.  The directory name can
contain any character; embedded double-quotes should be escaped by
double-quotes (the "quote-doubling" convention).
For example, a user connects to the directory /usr/dm, and creates
a subdirectory, named pathname:
An example with an embedded double quote:
The prior existence of a subdirectory with the same name is an
error, and the server must return an "access denied" error reply
521-"/usr/dm/pathname" directory already exists;
The failure replies for MKD are analogous to its file  creating
cousin, STOR.  Also, an "access denied" return is given if a file
name with the same name as the subdirectory will conflict with the
creation of the subdirectory (this is a problem on UNIX, but
Essentially because the PWD command returns the same type of
information as the successful MKD command, the successful PWD
command uses the 257 reply code as well.
Because these commands will be most useful in transferring
subtrees from one machine to another, carefully observe that the
argument to MKD is to be interpreted as a sub-directory of  the
current working directory, unless it contains enough information
for the destination host to tell otherwise.  A hypothetical
example of its use in the TOPS-20 world:
CWD <some.where.overrainbow>
Note that the first example results in a subdirectory of the
connected directory.  In contrast, the argument in the second
example contains enough information for TOPS-20 to tell that  the
<unambiguous> directory is a top-level directory.  Note also that
in the first example the user "violated" the protocol by
attempting to access the freshly created directory with a name
other than the one returned by TOPS-20.  Problems could have
resulted in this case had there been an <overrainbow> directory;
this is an ambiguity inherent in some TOPS-20 implementations.
Similar considerations apply to the RMD command.  The point is
this: except where to do so would violate a host's conventions for
denoting relative versus absolute pathnames, the host should treat
the operands of the MKD and RMD commands as subdirectories.  The
pathname of the created directory.
APPENDIX III - RFCs on FTP
Bhushan, Abhay, "A File Transfer Protocol", RFC 114 (NIC 5823),
Harslem, Eric, and John Heafner, "Comments on RFC 114 (A File
Bhushan, Abhay, et al, "The File Transfer Protocol", RFC 172
Bhushan, Abhay, et al, "The File Transfer Protocol", RFC 265
McKenzie, Alex, "A Suggested Addition to File Transfer Protocol",
Bhushan, Abhay, "The Use of "Set Data Type" Transaction in File
Transfer Protocol", RFC 294 (NIC 8304), MIT-Project MAC,
Bhushan, Abhay, "The File Transfer Protocol", RFC 354 (NIC 10596),
Bhushan, Abhay, "Comments on the File Transfer Protocol (RFC 354)",
Hicks, Greg, "User FTP Documentation", RFC 412 (NIC 12404), Utah,
Bhushan, Abhay, "File Transfer Protocol (FTP) Status and Further
Thomas, Bob, and Bob Clements, "FTP Server-Server Interaction",
McKenzie, Alex, "File Transfer Protocol", RFC 454 (NIC 14333), BBN,
Bressler, Bob, and Bob Thomas, "Mail Retrieval via FTP", RFC 458
Neigus, Nancy, "File Transfer Protocol", RFC 542 (NIC 17759), BBN,
Krilanovich, Mark, and George Gregg, "Comments on the File Transfer
Pogran, Ken, and Nancy Neigus, "Response to RFC 607 - Comments on the
Krilanovich, Mark, George Gregg, Wayne Hathaway, and Jim White,
"Comments on the File Transfer Protocol", RFC 624 (NIC 22054), UCSB,
Ames Research Center, SRI-ARC, 28 February 1974.
Bhushan, Abhay, "FTP Comments and Response to RFC 430", RFC 463
Bhushan, Abhay, "FTP and Network Mail System", RFC 475 (NIC 14919),
Bressler, Bob, and Bob Thomas "FTP Server-Server Interaction - II",
White, Jim, "Host-Dependent FTP Parameters", RFC 480 (NIC 14949),
Padlipsky, Mike, "An FTP Command-Naming Problem", RFC 506
Day, John, "Memo to FTP Group (Proposal for File Access Protocol)",
Merryman, Robert, "The UCSD-CC Server-FTP Facility", RFC 532
Schedule Change", RFC 593 (NIC 20615), BBN and MITRE,
Sussman, Julie, "FTP Error Code Usage for More Reliable Mail
Harvey, Brian, "Leaving Well Enough Alone", RFC 686 (NIC 32481),
Harrenstien, Ken, "FTP Extension: XSEN", RFC 737 (NIC 42217), SRI-KL,
Harrenstien, Ken, "FTP Extension: XRSQ/XRCP", RFC 743 (NIC 42758),
Lebling, P. David, "Survey of FTP Mail and MLFL", RFC 751, MIT,
Mankins, David, Dan Franklin, and Buzz Owen, "Directory Oriented FTP
Padlipsky, Michael, "FTP Unique-Named Store Command", RFC 949, MITRE,
[1]  Feinler, Elizabeth, "Internet Protocol Transition Workbook",
Network Information Center, SRI International, March 1982.
DOMAIN NAMES - IMPLEMENTATION AND SPECIFICATION
This RFC describes the details of the domain system and protocol, and
assumes that the reader is familiar with the concepts discussed in a
companion RFC, "Domain Names - Concepts and Facilities" [RFC-1034].
The domain system is a mixture of functions and data types which are an
official protocol and functions and data types which are still
experimental.  Since the domain system is intentionally extensible, new
data types and experimental behavior should always be expected in parts
of the system beyond the official protocol.  The official protocol parts
include standard queries, responses and the Internet class RR data
formats (e.g., host addresses).  Since the previous RFC set, several
definitions have changed, so some previous definitions are obsolete.
Experimental or obsolete features are clearly marked in these RFCs, and
such information should be used with caution.
The reader is especially cautioned not to depend on the values which
appear in examples to be current or complete, since their purpose is
primarily pedagogical.  Distribution of this memo is unlimited.
The goal of domain names is to provide a mechanism for naming resources
in such a way that the names are usable in different hosts, networks,
protocol families, internets, and administrative organizations.
From the user's point of view, domain names are useful as arguments to a
local agent, called a resolver, which retrieves information associated
with the domain name.  Thus a user might ask for the host address or
mail information associated with a particular domain name.  To enable
the user to request a particular type of information, an appropriate
query type is passed to the resolver with the domain name.  To the user,
the domain tree is a single information space; the resolver is
responsible for hiding the distribution of data among name servers from
From the resolver's point of view, the database that makes up the domain
space is distributed among various name servers.  Different parts of the
domain space are stored in different name servers, although a particular
data item will be stored redundantly in two or more name servers.  The
resolver starts with knowledge of at least one name server.  When the
resolver processes a user query it asks a known name server for the
information; in return, the resolver either receives the desired
information or a referral to another name server.  Using these
referrals, resolvers learn the identities and contents of other name
servers.  Resolvers are responsible for dealing with the distribution of
the domain space and dealing with the effects of name server failure by
consulting redundant databases in other servers.
Name servers manage two kinds of data.  The first kind of data held in
sets called zones; each zone is the complete database for a particular
"pruned" subtree of the domain space.  This data is called
authoritative.  A name server periodically checks to make sure that its
zones are up to date, and if not, obtains a new copy of updated zones
from master files stored locally or in another name server.  The second
kind of data is cached data which was acquired by a local resolver.
This data may be incomplete, but improves the performance of the
retrieval process when non-local data is repeatedly accessed.  Cached
data is eventually discarded by a timeout mechanism.
This functional structure isolates the problems of user interface,
failure recovery, and distribution in the resolvers and isolates the
database update and refresh problems in the name servers.
A host can participate in the domain name system in a number of ways,
depending on whether the host runs programs that retrieve information
from the domain system, name servers that answer queries from other
hosts, or various combinations of both functions.  The simplest, and
perhaps most typical, configuration is shown below:
User programs interact with the domain name space through resolvers; the
format of user queries and user responses is specific to the host and
its operating system.  User queries will typically be operating system
calls, and the resolver and its cache will be part of the host operating
system.  Less capable hosts may choose to implement the resolver as a
subroutine to be linked in with every program that needs its services.
Resolvers answer user queries with information they acquire via queries
to foreign name servers and the local cache.
Note that the resolver may have to make several queries to several
different foreign name servers to answer a particular user query, and
hence the resolution of a user query may involve several network
accesses and an arbitrary amount of time.  The queries to foreign name
servers and the corresponding responses have a standard format described
in this memo, and may be datagrams.
Depending on its capabilities, a name server could be a stand alone
program on a dedicated machine or a process or processes on a large
timeshared host.  A simple configuration might be:
Here a primary name server acquires information about one or more zones
by reading master files from its local file system, and answers queries
about those zones that arrive from foreign resolvers.
The DNS requires that all zones be redundantly supported by more than
one name server.  Designated secondary servers can acquire zones and
check for updates from the primary server using the zone transfer
protocol of the DNS.  This configuration is shown below:
In this configuration, the name server periodically establishes a
virtual circuit to a foreign name server to acquire a copy of a zone or
to check that an existing copy has not changed.  The messages sent for
these maintenance activities follow the same form as queries and
responses, but the message sequences are somewhat different.
The information flow in a host that supports all aspects of the domain
name system is shown below:
The shared database holds domain space data for the local name server
and resolver.  The contents of the shared database will typically be a
mixture of authoritative data maintained by the periodic refresh
operations of the name server and cached data from previous resolver
requests.  The structure of the domain data and the necessity for
synchronization between name servers and resolvers imply the general
characteristics of this database, but the actual format is up to the
Information flow can also be tailored so that a group of hosts act
together to optimize activities.  Sometimes this is done to offload less
capable hosts so that they do not have to implement a full resolver.
This can be appropriate for PCs or hosts which want to minimize the
amount of new network code which is required.  This scheme can also
allow a group of hosts can share a small number of caches rather than
maintaining a large number of separate caches, on the premise that the
centralized caches will have a higher hit ratio.  In either case,
resolvers are replaced with stub resolvers which act as front ends to
resolvers located in a recursive server in one or more name servers
known to perform that service:
In any case, note that domain components are always replicated for
reliability whenever possible.
The domain system has several conventions dealing with low-level, but
fundamental, issues.  While the implementor is free to violate these
conventions WITHIN HIS OWN SYSTEM, he must observe these conventions in
ALL behavior observed from other hosts.
The DNS specifications attempt to be as general as possible in the rules
for constructing domain names.  The idea is that the name of any
existing object can be expressed as a domain name with minimal changes.
However, when assigning a domain name for an object, the prudent user
will select a name which satisfies both the rules of the domain system
and any existing rules for the object, whether these rules are published
or implied by existing programs.
For example, when naming a mail domain, the user should satisfy both the
rules of this memo and those in RFC-822.  When creating a new host name,
the old rules for HOSTS.TXT should be followed.  This avoids problems
when old software is converted to use domain names.
The following syntax will result in fewer problems with many
applications that use domain names (e.g., mail, TELNET).
<subdomain> ::= <label> | <subdomain> "." <label>
<ldh-str> ::= <let-dig-hyp> | <let-dig-hyp> <ldh-str>
<letter> ::= any one of the 52 alphabetic characters A through Z in
upper case and a through z in lower case
<digit> ::= any one of the ten digits 0 through 9
Note that while upper and lower case letters are allowed in domain
names, no significance is attached to the case.  That is, two names with
the same spelling but different case are to be treated as if identical.
The labels must follow the rules for ARPANET host names.  They must
start with a letter, end with a letter or digit, and have as interior
characters only letters, digits, and hyphen.  There are also some
restrictions on the length.  Labels must be 63 characters or less.
For example, the following strings identify hosts in the Internet:
A.ISI.EDU XX.LCS.MIT.EDU SRI-NIC.ARPA
The order of transmission of the header and data described in this
document is resolved to the octet level.  Whenever a diagram shows a
group of octets, the order of transmission of those octets is the normal
order in which they are read in English.  For example, in the following
diagram, the octets are transmitted in the order they are numbered.
Whenever an octet represents a numeric quantity, the left most bit in
the diagram is the high order or most significant bit.  That is, the bit
labeled 0 is the most significant bit.  For example, the following
diagram represents the value 170 (decimal).
Similarly, whenever a multi-octet field represents a numeric quantity
the left most bit of the whole field is the most significant bit.  When
a multi-octet quantity is transmitted the most significant octet is
For all parts of the DNS that are part of the official protocol, all
comparisons between character strings (e.g., labels, domain names, etc.)
are done in a case-insensitive manner.  At present, this rule is in
force throughout the domain system without exception.  However, future
additions beyond current usage may need to use the full binary octet
capabilities in names, so attempts to store domain names in 7-bit ASCII
or use of special bytes to terminate labels, etc., should be avoided.
When data enters the domain system, its original case should be
preserved whenever possible.  In certain circumstances this cannot be
done.  For example, if two RRs are stored in a database, one at x.y and
one at X.Y, they are actually stored at the same place in the database,
and hence only one casing would be preserved.  The basic rule is that
case can be discarded only when data is used to define structure in a
database, and two names are identical when compared in a case
Loss of case sensitive data must be minimized.  Thus while data for x.y
and X.Y may both be stored under a single location x.y or X.Y, data for
a.x and B.X would never be stored under A.x, A.X, b.x, or b.X.  In
general, this preserves the case of the first label of a domain name,
but forces standardization of interior node labels.
Systems administrators who enter data into the domain database should
take care to represent the data they supply to the domain system in a
case-consistent manner if their system is case-sensitive.  The data
distribution system in the domain system will ensure that consistent
representations are preserved.
Various objects and parameters in the DNS have size limits.  They are
listed below.  Some could be easily changed, others are more
TTL             positive values of a signed 32 bit number.
UDP messages    512 octets or less
Domain names in messages are expressed in terms of a sequence of labels.
Each label is represented as a one octet length field followed by that
number of octets.  Since every domain name ends with the null label of
the root, a domain name is terminated by a length byte of zero.  The
high order two bits of every length octet must be zero, and the
remaining six bits of the length field limit the label to 63 octets or
To simplify implementations, the total length of a domain name (i.e.,
label octets and label length octets) is restricted to 255 octets or
Although labels can contain any 8 bit values in octets that make up a
label, it is strongly recommended that labels follow the preferred
syntax described elsewhere in this memo, which is compatible with
existing host naming conventions.  Name servers and resolvers must
compare labels in a case-insensitive manner (i.e., A=a), assuming ASCII
with zero parity.  Non-alphabetic codes must match exactly.
All RRs have the same top level format shown below:
NAME            an owner name, i.e., the name of the node to which this
TYPE            two octets containing one of the RR TYPE codes.
CLASS           two octets containing one of the RR CLASS codes.
TTL             a 32 bit signed integer that specifies the time interval
that the resource record may be cached before the source
of the information should again be consulted.  Zero
values are interpreted to mean that the RR can only be
used for the transaction in progress, and should not be
cached.  For example, SOA records are always distributed
with a zero TTL to prohibit caching.  Zero values can
also be used for extremely volatile data.
RDLENGTH        an unsigned 16 bit integer that specifies the length in
RDATA           a variable length string of octets that describes the
resource.  The format of this information varies
according to the TYPE and CLASS of the resource record.
TYPE fields are used in resource records.  Note that these types are a
NS              2 an authoritative name server
MD              3 a mail destination (Obsolete - use MX)
CNAME           5 the canonical name for an alias
SOA             6 marks the start of a zone of authority
MB              7 a mailbox domain name (EXPERIMENTAL)
MG              8 a mail group member (EXPERIMENTAL)
MR              9 a mail rename domain name (EXPERIMENTAL)
WKS             11 a well known service description
HINFO           13 host information
MINFO           14 mailbox or mail list information
QTYPE fields appear in the question part of a query.  QTYPES are a
superset of TYPEs, hence all TYPEs are valid QTYPEs.  In addition, the
following QTYPEs are defined:
AXFR            252 A request for a transfer of an entire zone
MAILB           253 A request for mailbox-related records (MB, MG or MR)
MAILA           254 A request for mail agent RRs (Obsolete - see MX)
CLASS fields appear in resource records.  The following CLASS mnemonics
CS              2 the CSNET class (Obsolete - used only for examples in
QCLASS fields appear in the question section of a query.  QCLASS values
are a superset of CLASS values; every CLASS is a valid QCLASS.  In
addition to CLASS values, the following QCLASSes are defined:
The following RR definitions are expected to occur, at least
potentially, in all classes.  In particular, NS, SOA, CNAME, and PTR
will be used in all classes, and have the same format in all classes.
Because their RDATA format is known, all domain names in the RDATA
section of these RRs may be compressed.
<domain-name> is a domain name represented as a series of labels, and
terminated by a label with zero length.  <character-string> is a single
length octet followed by that number of characters.  <character-string>
is treated as binary information, and can be up to 256 characters in
length (including the length octet).
CNAME           A <domain-name> which specifies the canonical or primary
name for the owner.  The owner name is an alias.
CNAME RRs cause no additional section processing, but name servers may
choose to restart the query at the canonical name in certain cases.  See
the description of name server logic in [RFC-1034] for details.
CPU             A <character-string> which specifies the CPU type.
OS              A <character-string> which specifies the operating
Standard values for CPU and OS can be found in [RFC-1010].
HINFO records are used to acquire general information about a host.  The
main use is for protocols such as FTP that can use special procedures
when talking between machines or operating systems of the same type.
MADNAME         A <domain-name> which specifies a host which has the
MB records cause additional section processing which looks up an A type
RRs corresponding to MADNAME.
MADNAME         A <domain-name> which specifies a host which has a mail
agent for the domain which should be able to deliver
MD records cause additional section processing which looks up an A type
record corresponding to MADNAME.
MD is obsolete.  See the definition of MX and [RFC-974] for details of
the new scheme.  The recommended policy for dealing with MD RRs found in
a master file is to reject them, or to convert them to MX RRs with a
agent for the domain which will accept mail for
MF records cause additional section processing which looks up an A type
MF is obsolete.  See the definition of MX and [RFC-974] for details ofw
MGMNAME         A <domain-name> which specifies a mailbox which is a
member of the mail group specified by the domain name.
MG records cause no additional section processing.
RMAILBX         A <domain-name> which specifies a mailbox which is
responsible for the mailing list or mailbox.  If this
domain name names the root, the owner of the MINFO RR is
responsible for itself.  Note that many existing mailing
lists use a mailbox X-request for the RMAILBX field of
mailing list X, e.g., Msgroup-request for Msgroup.  This
field provides a more general mechanism.
EMAILBX         A <domain-name> which specifies a mailbox which is to
receive error messages related to the mailing list or
mailbox specified by the owner of the MINFO RR (similar
to the ERRORS-TO: field which has been proposed).  If
this domain name names the root, errors should be
returned to the sender of the message.
MINFO records cause no additional section processing.  Although these
records can be associated with a simple mailbox, they are usually used
NEWNAME         A <domain-name> which specifies a mailbox which is the
proper rename of the specified mailbox.
MR records cause no additional section processing.  The main use for MR
is as a forwarding entry for a user who has moved to a different
PREFERENCE      A 16 bit integer which specifies the preference given to
this RR among others at the same owner.  Lower values
EXCHANGE        A <domain-name> which specifies a host willing to act as
MX records cause type A additional section processing for the host
specified by EXCHANGE.  The use of MX RRs is explained in detail in
Anything at all may be in the RDATA field so long as it is 65535 octets
NULL records cause no additional section processing.  NULL RRs are not
allowed in master files.  NULLs are used as placeholders in some
experimental extensions of the DNS.
NSDNAME         A <domain-name> which specifies a host which should be
authoritative for the specified class and domain.
NS records cause both the usual additional section processing to locate
a type A record, and, when used in a referral, a special search of the
zone in which they reside for glue information.
The NS RR states that the named host should be expected to have a zone
starting at owner name of the specified class.  Note that the class may
not indicate the protocol family which should be used to communicate
with the host, although it is typically a strong hint.  For example,
hosts which are name servers for either Internet (IN) or Hesiod (HS)
class information are normally queried using IN class protocols.
PTRDNAME        A <domain-name> which points to some location in the
PTR records cause no additional section processing.  These RRs are used
in special domains to point to some other location in the domain space.
These records are simple data, and don't imply any special processing
similar to that performed by CNAME, which identifies aliases.  See the
description of the IN-ADDR.ARPA domain for an example.
MNAME           The <domain-name> of the name server that was the
original or primary source of data for this zone.
RNAME           A <domain-name> which specifies the mailbox of the
person responsible for this zone.
SERIAL          The unsigned 32 bit version number of the original copy
of the zone.  Zone transfers preserve this value.  This
value wraps and should be compared using sequence space
REFRESH         A 32 bit time interval before the zone should be
RETRY           A 32 bit time interval that should elapse before a
failed refresh should be retried.
EXPIRE          A 32 bit time value that specifies the upper limit on
the time interval that can elapse before the zone is no
MINIMUM         The unsigned 32 bit minimum TTL field that should be
exported with any RR from this zone.
SOA records cause no additional section processing.
All times are in units of seconds.
Most of these fields are pertinent only for name server maintenance
operations.  However, MINIMUM is used in all query operations that
retrieve RRs from a zone.  Whenever a RR is sent in a response to a
query, the TTL field is set to the maximum of the TTL field from the RR
and the MINIMUM field in the appropriate SOA.  Thus MINIMUM is a lower
bound on the TTL field for all RRs in a zone.  Note that this use of
MINIMUM should occur when the RRs are copied into the response and not
when the zone is loaded from a master file or via a zone transfer.  The
reason for this provison is to allow future dynamic update facilities to
change the SOA RR with known semantics.
TXT-DATA        One or more <character-string>s.
TXT RRs are used to hold descriptive text.  The semantics of the text
depends on the domain where it is found.
ADDRESS         A 32 bit Internet address.
Hosts that have multiple Internet addresses will have multiple A
A records cause no additional section processing.  The RDATA section of
an A line in a master file is an Internet address expressed as four
decimal numbers separated by dots without any imbedded spaces (e.g.,
ADDRESS         An 32 bit Internet address
PROTOCOL        An 8 bit IP protocol number
<BIT MAP>       A variable length bit map.  The bit map must be a
The WKS record is used to describe the well known services supported by
a particular protocol on a particular internet address.  The PROTOCOL
field specifies an IP protocol number, and the bit map has one bit per
port of the specified protocol.  The first bit corresponds to port 0,
the second to port 1, etc.  If the bit map does not include a bit for a
protocol of interest, that bit is assumed zero.  The appropriate values
and mnemonics for ports and protocols are specified in [RFC-1010].
For example, if PROTOCOL=TCP (6), the 26th bit corresponds to TCP port
port 25; if zero, SMTP service is not supported on the specified
The purpose of WKS RRs is to provide availability information for
servers for TCP and UDP.  If a server supports both TCP and UDP, or has
multiple Internet addresses, then multiple WKS RRs are used.
WKS RRs cause no additional section processing.
In master files, both ports and protocols are expressed using mnemonics
The Internet uses a special domain to support gateway location and
strategy in other domains.  The intent of this domain is to provide a
guaranteed method to perform host address to host name mapping, and to
facilitate queries to locate all gateways on a particular network in the
Note that both of these services are similar to functions that could be
performed by inverse queries; the difference is that this part of the
domain name space is structured according to address, and hence can
guarantee that the appropriate data can be located without an exhaustive
search of the domain space.
The domain begins at IN-ADDR.ARPA and has a substructure which follows
the Internet addressing structure.
Domain names in the IN-ADDR.ARPA domain are defined to have up to four
labels in addition to the IN-ADDR.ARPA suffix.  Each label represents
one octet of an Internet address, and is expressed as a character string
for a decimal value in the range 0-255 (with leading zeros omitted
except in the case of a zero octet which is represented by a single
Host addresses are represented by domain names that have all four labels
specified.  Thus data for Internet address 10.2.0.52 is located at
domain name 52.0.2.10.IN-ADDR.ARPA.  The reversal, though awkward to
read, allows zones to be delegated which are exactly one network of
address space.  For example, 10.IN-ADDR.ARPA can be a zone containing
data for the ARPANET, while 26.IN-ADDR.ARPA can be a separate zone for
MILNET.  Address nodes are used to hold pointers to primary host names
in the normal domain space.
Network numbers correspond to some non-terminal nodes at various depths
in the IN-ADDR.ARPA domain, since Internet network numbers are either 1,
2, or 3 octets.  Network nodes are used to hold pointers to the primary
host names of gateways attached to that network.  Since a gateway is, by
definition, on more than one network, it will typically have two or more
network nodes which point at it.  Gateways will also have host level
pointers at their fully qualified addresses.
Both the gateway pointers at network nodes and the normal host pointers
at full address nodes use the PTR RR to point back to the primary domain
names of the corresponding hosts.
For example, the IN-ADDR.ARPA domain will contain information about the
ISI gateway between net 10 and 26, an MIT gateway from net 10 to MIT's
net 18, and hosts A.ISI.EDU and MULTICS.MIT.EDU.  Assuming that ISI
GW.ISI.EDU, and the MIT gateway has addresses 10.0.0.77 and 18.10.0.4
and a name GW.LCS.MIT.EDU, the domain database would contain:
Thus a program which wanted to locate gateways on net 10 would originate
a query of the form QTYPE=PTR, QCLASS=IN, QNAME=10.IN-ADDR.ARPA.  It
would receive two RRs in response:
The program could then originate QTYPE=A, QCLASS=IN queries for MILNET-
GW.ISI.EDU. and GW.LCS.MIT.EDU. to discover the Internet addresses of
A resolver which wanted to find the host name corresponding to Internet
host address 10.0.0.6 would pursue a query of the form QTYPE=PTR,
QCLASS=IN, QNAME=6.0.0.10.IN-ADDR.ARPA, and would receive:
Several cautions apply to the use of these services:
- Since the IN-ADDR.ARPA special domain and the normal domain
for a particular host or gateway will be in different zones,
the possibility exists that that the data may be inconsistent.
- Gateways will often have two names in separate domains, only
one of which can be primary.
- Systems that use the domain database to initialize their
routing tables must start with enough gateway information to
guarantee that they can access the appropriate name server.
- The gateway data only reflects the existence of a gateway in a
manner equivalent to the current HOSTS.TXT file.  It doesn't
replace the dynamic availability information from GGP or EGP.
The previously defined types and classes are the ones in use as of the
date of this memo.  New definitions should be expected.  This section
makes some recommendations to designers considering additions to the
existing facilities.  The mailing list NAMEDROPPERS@SRI-NIC.ARPA is the
forum where general discussion of design issues takes place.
In general, a new type is appropriate when new information is to be
added to the database about an existing object, or we need new data
formats for some totally new object.  Designers should attempt to define
types and their RDATA formats that are generally applicable to all
classes, and which avoid duplication of information.  New classes are
appropriate when the DNS is to be used for a new protocol, etc which
requires new class-specific data formats, or when a copy of the existing
name space is desired, but a separate management domain is necessary.
New types and classes need mnemonics for master files; the format of the
master files requires that the mnemonics for type and class be disjoint.
TYPE and CLASS values must be a proper subset of QTYPEs and QCLASSes
The present system uses multiple RRs to represent multiple values of a
type rather than storing multiple values in the RDATA section of a
single RR.  This is less efficient for most applications, but does keep
RRs shorter.  The multiple RRs assumption is incorporated in some
experimental work on dynamic update methods.
The present system attempts to minimize the duplication of data in the
database in order to insure consistency.  Thus, in order to find the
address of the host for a mail exchange, you map the mail domain name to
a host name, then the host name to addresses, rather than a direct
mapping to host address.  This approach is preferred because it avoids
the opportunity for inconsistency.
In defining a new type of data, multiple RR types should not be used to
create an ordering between entries or express different formats for
equivalent bindings, instead this information should be carried in the
body of the RR and a single type used.  This policy avoids problems with
caching multiple types and defining QTYPEs to match multiple types.
For example, the original form of mail exchange binding used two RR
types one to represent a "closer" exchange (MD) and one to represent a
"less close" exchange (MF).  The difficulty is that the presence of one
RR type in a cache doesn't convey any information about the other
because the query which acquired the cached information might have used
a QTYPE of MF, MD, or MAILA (which matched both).  The redesigned
service used a single type (MX) with a "preference" value in the RDATA
section which can order different RRs.  However, if any MX RRs are found
in the cache, then all should be there.
All communications inside of the domain protocol are carried in a single
format called a message.  The top level format of message is divided
into 5 sections (some of which are empty in certain cases) shown below:
|       Question      | the question for the name server
|      Authority      | RRs pointing toward an authority
|      Additional     | RRs holding additional information
The header section is always present.  The header includes fields that
specify which of the remaining sections are present, and also specify
whether the message is a query or a response, a standard query or some
The names of the sections after the header are derived from their use in
standard queries.  The question section contains fields that describe a
question to a name server.  These fields are a query type (QTYPE), a
query class (QCLASS), and a query domain name (QNAME).  The last three
sections have the same format: a possibly empty list of concatenated
resource records (RRs).  The answer section contains RRs that answer the
question; the authority section contains RRs that point toward an
authoritative name server; the additional records section contains RRs
which relate to the query, but are not strictly answers for the
The header contains the following fields:
ID              A 16 bit identifier assigned by the program that
generates any kind of query.  This identifier is copied
the corresponding reply and can be used by the requester
to match up replies to outstanding queries.
QR              A one bit field that specifies whether this message is a
OPCODE          A four bit field that specifies kind of query in this
message.  This value is set by the originator of a query
and copied into the response.  The values are:
AA              Authoritative Answer - this bit is valid in responses,
and specifies that the responding name server is an
authority for the domain name in question section.
Note that the contents of the answer section may have
multiple owner names because of aliases.  The AA bit
corresponds to the name which matches the query name, or
the first owner name in the answer section.
TC              TrunCation - specifies that this message was truncated
due to length greater than that permitted on the
RD              Recursion Desired - this bit may be set in a query and
is copied into the response.  If RD is set, it directs
the name server to pursue the query recursively.
Recursive query support is optional.
RA              Recursion Available - this be is set or cleared in a
response, and denotes whether recursive query support is
Z               Reserved for future use.  Must be zero in all queries
RCODE           Response code - this 4 bit field is set as part of
responses.  The values have the following
QDCOUNT         an unsigned 16 bit integer specifying the number of
entries in the question section.
ANCOUNT         an unsigned 16 bit integer specifying the number of
resource records in the answer section.
NSCOUNT         an unsigned 16 bit integer specifying the number of name
server resource records in the authority records
ARCOUNT         an unsigned 16 bit integer specifying the number of
resource records in the additional records section.
The question section is used to carry the "question" in most queries,
i.e., the parameters that define what is being asked.  The section
contains QDCOUNT (usually 1) entries, each of the following format:
QNAME           a domain name represented as a sequence of labels, where
each label consists of a length octet followed by that
number of octets.  The domain name terminates with the
zero length octet for the null label of the root.  Note
that this field may be an odd number of octets; no
QTYPE           a two octet code which specifies the type of the query.
The values for this field include all codes valid for a
TYPE field, together with some more general codes which
QCLASS          a two octet code that specifies the class of the query.
For example, the QCLASS field is IN for the Internet.
The answer, authority, and additional sections all share the same
format: a variable number of resource records, where the number of
records is specified in the corresponding count field in the header.
Each resource record has the following format:
NAME            a domain name to which this resource record pertains.
TYPE            two octets containing one of the RR type codes.  This
field specifies the meaning of the data in the RDATA
CLASS           two octets which specify the class of the data in the
TTL             a 32 bit unsigned integer that specifies the time
interval (in seconds) that the resource record may be
cached before it should be discarded.  Zero values are
interpreted to mean that the RR can only be used for the
transaction in progress, and should not be cached.
For example, the if the TYPE is A and the CLASS is IN,
the RDATA field is a 4 octet ARPA Internet address.
In order to reduce the size of messages, the domain system utilizes a
compression scheme which eliminates the repetition of domain names in a
message.  In this scheme, an entire domain name or a list of labels at
the end of a domain name is replaced with a pointer to a prior occurance
The pointer takes the form of a two octet sequence:
The first two bits are ones.  This allows a pointer to be distinguished
from a label, since the label must begin with two zero bits because
labels are restricted to 63 octets or less.  (The 10 and 01 combinations
are reserved for future use.)  The OFFSET field specifies an offset from
the start of the message (i.e., the first octet of the ID field in the
domain header).  A zero offset specifies the first byte of the ID field,
The compression scheme allows a domain name in a message to be
- a sequence of labels ending in a zero octet
- a sequence of labels ending with a pointer
Pointers can only be used for occurances of a domain name where the
format is not class specific.  If this were not the case, a name server
or resolver would be required to know the format of all RRs it handled.
As yet, there are no such cases, but they may occur in future RDATA
If a domain name is contained in a part of the message subject to a
length field (such as the RDATA section of an RR), and compression is
used, the length of the compressed name is used in the length
calculation, rather than the length of the expanded name.
Programs are free to avoid using pointers in messages they generate,
although this will reduce datagram capacity, and may cause truncation.
However all programs are required to understand arriving messages that
For example, a datagram might need to use the domain names F.ISI.ARPA,
FOO.F.ISI.ARPA, ARPA, and the root.  Ignoring the other fields of the
message, these domain names might be represented as:
The domain name for F.ISI.ARPA is shown at offset 20.  The domain name
FOO.F.ISI.ARPA is shown at offset 40; this definition uses a pointer to
concatenate a label for FOO to the previously defined F.ISI.ARPA.  The
domain name ARPA is defined at offset 64 using a pointer to the ARPA
component of the name F.ISI.ARPA at 20; note that this pointer relies on
ARPA being the last label in the string at 20.  The root domain name is
defined by a single octet of zeros at 92; the root domain name has no
The DNS assumes that messages will be transmitted as datagrams or in a
byte stream carried by a virtual circuit.  While virtual circuits can be
used for any DNS activity, datagrams are preferred for queries due to
their lower overhead and better performance.  Zone refresh activities
must use virtual circuits because of the need for reliable transfer.
The Internet supports name server access using TCP [RFC-793] on server
port 53 (decimal) as well as datagram access using UDP [RFC-768] on UDP
Messages sent using UDP user server port 53 (decimal).
Messages carried by UDP are restricted to 512 bytes (not counting the IP
or UDP headers).  Longer messages are truncated and the TC bit is set in
UDP is not acceptable for zone transfers, but is the recommended method
for standard queries in the Internet.  Queries sent using UDP may be
lost, and hence a retransmission strategy is required.  Queries or their
responses may be reordered by the network, or by processing in name
servers, so resolvers should not depend on them being returned in order.
The optimal UDP retransmission policy will vary with performance of the
- The client should try other servers and server addresses
before repeating a query to a specific address of a server.
- The retransmission interval should be based on prior
statistics if possible.  Too aggressive retransmission can
easily slow responses for the community at large.  Depending
on how well connected the client is to its expected servers,
the minimum retransmission interval should be 2-5 seconds.
More suggestions on server selection and retransmission policy can be
found in the resolver section of this memo.
Messages sent over TCP connections use server port 53 (decimal).  The
message is prefixed with a two byte length field which gives the message
length, excluding the two byte length field.  This length field allows
the low-level processing to assemble a complete message before beginning
Several connection management policies are recommended:
- The server should not block other activities waiting for TCP
- The server should support multiple connections.
- The server should assume that the client will initiate
connection closing, and should delay closing its end of the
connection until all outstanding client requests have been
- If the server needs to close a dormant connection to reclaim
resources, it should wait until the connection has been idle
for a period on the order of two minutes.  In particular, the
server should allow the SOA and AXFR request sequence (which
begins a refresh operation) to be made on a single connection.
Since the server would be unable to answer queries anyway, a
unilateral close or reset may be used instead of a graceful
Master files are text files that contain RRs in text form.  Since the
contents of a zone can be expressed in the form of a list of RRs a
master file is most often used to define a zone, though it can be used
to list a cache's contents.  Hence, this section first discusses the
format of RRs in a master file, and then the special considerations when
a master file is used to create a zone in some name server.
The format of these files is a sequence of entries.  Entries are
predominantly line-oriented, though parentheses can be used to continue
a list of items across a line boundary, and text literals can contain
CRLF within the text.  Any combination of tabs and spaces act as a
delimiter between the separate items that make up an entry.  The end of
any line in the master file can end with a comment.  The comment starts
The following entries are defined:
$ORIGIN <domain-name> [<comment>]
$INCLUDE <file-name> [<domain-name>] [<comment>]
Blank lines, with or without comments, are allowed anywhere in the file.
Two control entries are defined: $ORIGIN and $INCLUDE.  $ORIGIN is
followed by a domain name, and resets the current origin for relative
domain names to the stated name.  $INCLUDE inserts the named file into
the current file, and may optionally specify a domain name that sets the
relative domain name origin for the included file.  $INCLUDE may also
have a comment.  Note that a $INCLUDE entry never changes the relative
origin of the parent file, regardless of changes to the relative origin
made within the included file.
The last two forms represent RRs.  If an entry for an RR begins with a
blank, then the RR is assumed to be owned by the last stated owner.  If
an RR entry begins with a <domain-name>, then the owner name is reset.
<rr> contents take one of the following forms:
The RR begins with optional TTL and class fields, followed by a type and
RDATA field appropriate to the type and class.  Class and type use the
standard mnemonics, TTL is a decimal integer.  Omitted class and TTL
values are default to the last explicitly stated values.  Since type and
class mnemonics are disjoint, the parse is unique.  (Note that this
order is different from the order used in examples and the order used in
the actual RRs; the given order allows easier parsing and defaulting.)
<domain-name>s make up a large share of the data in the master file.
The labels in the domain name are expressed as character strings and
separated by dots.  Quoting conventions allow arbitrary characters to be
stored in domain names.  Domain names that end in a dot are called
absolute, and are taken as complete.  Domain names which do not end in a
dot are called relative; the actual domain name is the concatenation of
the relative part with an origin specified in a $ORIGIN, $INCLUDE, or as
an argument to the master file loading routine.  A relative name is an
error when no origin is available.
<character-string> is expressed in one or two ways: as a contiguous set
of characters without interior spaces, or as a string beginning with a "
and ending with a ".  Inside a " delimited string any character can
occur, except for a " itself, which must be quoted using \ (back slash).
Because these files are text files several special encodings are
necessary to allow arbitrary data to be loaded.  In particular:
@               A free standing @ is used to denote the current origin.
\X              where X is any character other than a digit (0-9), is
used to quote that character so that its special meaning
\DDD            where each D is a digit is the octet corresponding to
the decimal number described by DDD.  The resulting
octet is assumed to be text and is not checked for
( )             Parentheses are used to group data that crosses a line
boundary.  In effect, line terminations are not
recognized within parentheses.
;               Semicolon is used to start a comment; the remainder of
When a master file is used to load a zone, the operation should be
suppressed if any errors are encountered in the master file.  The
rationale for this is that a single error can have widespread
consequences.  For example, suppose that the RRs defining a delegation
have syntax errors; then the server will return authoritative name
errors for all names in the subzone (except in the case where the
subzone is also present on the server).
Several other validity checks that should be performed in addition to
insuring that the file is syntactically correct:
zone should be glue information, rather than the result of an
origin or similar error.
The following is an example file which might be used to define the
ISI.EDU zone.and is loaded with an origin of ISI.EDU:
$INCLUDE <SUBSYS>ISI-MAILBOXES.TXT
Where the file <SUBSYS>ISI-MAILBOXES.TXT is:
Note the use of the \ character in the SOA RR to specify the responsible
person mailbox "Action.domains@E.ISI.EDU".
The optimal structure for the name server will depend on the host
operating system and whether the name server is integrated with resolver
operations, either by supporting recursive service, or by sharing its
database with a resolver.  This section discusses implementation
considerations for a name server which shares a database with a
resolver, but most of these concerns are present in any name server.
A name server must employ multiple concurrent activities, whether they
are implemented as separate tasks in the host's OS or multiplexing
inside a single name server program.  It is simply not acceptable for a
name server to block the service of UDP requests while it waits for TCP
data for refreshing or query activities.  Similarly, a name server
should not attempt to provide recursive service without processing such
requests in parallel, though it may choose to serialize requests from a
single client, or to regard identical requests from the same client as
duplicates.  A name server should not substantially delay requests while
it reloads a zone from master files or while it incorporates a newly
refreshed zone into its database.
While name server implementations are free to use any internal data
structures they choose, the suggested structure consists of three major
- A "catalog" data structure which lists the zones available to
this server, and a "pointer" to the zone data structure.  The
main purpose of this structure is to find the nearest ancestor
zone, if any, for arriving standard queries.
- Separate data structures for each of the zones held by the
- A data structure for cached data. (or perhaps separate caches
All of these data structures can be implemented an identical tree
structure format, with different data chained off the nodes in different
parts: in the catalog the data is pointers to zones, while in the zone
and cache data structures, the data will be RRs.  In designing the tree
framework the designer should recognize that query processing will need
to traverse the tree using case-insensitive label comparisons; and that
in real data, a few nodes have a very high branching factor (100-1000 or
more), but the vast majority have a very low branching factor (0-1).
One way to solve the case problem is to store the labels for each node
in two pieces: a standardized-case representation of the label where all
ASCII characters are in a single case, together with a bit mask that
denotes which characters are actually of a different case.  The
branching factor diversity can be handled using a simple linked list for
a node until the branching factor exceeds some threshold, and
transitioning to a hash structure after the threshold is exceeded.  In
any case, hash structures used to store tree sections must insure that
hash functions and procedures preserve the casing conventions of the
The use of separate structures for the different parts of the database
is motivated by several factors:
- The catalog structure can be an almost static structure that
need change only when the system administrator changes the
zones supported by the server.  This structure can also be
used to store parameters used to control refreshing
- The individual data structures for zones allow a zone to be
replaced simply by changing a pointer in the catalog.  Zone
refresh operations can build a new structure and, when
complete, splice it into the database via a simple pointer
replacement.  It is very important that when a zone is
refreshed, queries should not use old and new data
- With the proper search procedures, authoritative data in zones
will always "hide", and hence take precedence over, cached
- Errors in zone definitions that cause overlapping zones, etc.,
may cause erroneous responses to queries, but problem
determination is simplified, and the contents of one "bad"
zone can't corrupt another.
- Since the cache is most frequently updated, it is most
vulnerable to corruption during system restarts.  It can also
become full of expired RR data.  In either case, it can easily
be discarded without disturbing zone data.
A major aspect of database design is selecting a structure which allows
the name server to deal with crashes of the name server's host.  State
information which a name server should save across system crashes
includes the catalog structure (including the state of refreshing for
each zone) and the zone data itself.
Both the TTL data for RRs and the timing data for refreshing activities
depends on 32 bit timers in units of seconds.  Inside the database,
refresh timers and TTLs for cached data conceptually "count down", while
data in the zone stays with constant TTLs.
A recommended implementation strategy is to store time in two ways:  as
a relative increment and as an absolute time.  One way to do this is to
use positive 32 bit numbers for one type and negative numbers for the
other.  The RRs in zones use relative times; the refresh timers and
cache data use absolute times.  Absolute numbers are taken with respect
to some known origin and converted to relative values when placed in the
response to a query.  When an absolute TTL is negative after conversion
to relative, then the data is expired and should be ignored.
The major algorithm for standard query processing is presented in
When processing queries with QCLASS=*, or some other QCLASS which
matches multiple classes, the response should never be authoritative
unless the server can guarantee that the response covers all classes.
When composing a response, RRs which are to be inserted in the
additional section, but duplicate RRs in the answer or authority
sections, may be omitted from the additional section.
When a response is so long that truncation is required, the truncation
should start at the end of the response and work forward in the
datagram.  Thus if there is any data for the authority section, the
answer section is guaranteed to be unique.
The MINIMUM value in the SOA should be used to set a floor on the TTL of
data distributed from a zone.  This floor function should be done when
the data is copied into a response.  This will allow future dynamic
update protocols to change the SOA MINIMUM field without ambiguous
In spite of a server's best efforts, it may be unable to load zone data
from a master file due to syntax errors, etc., or be unable to refresh a
zone within the its expiration parameter.  In this case, the name server
should answer queries as if it were not supposed to possess the zone.
If a master is sending a zone out via AXFR, and a new version is created
during the transfer, the master should continue to send the old version
if possible.  In any case, it should never send part of one version and
part of another.  If completion is not possible, the master should reset
the connection on which the zone transfer is taking place.
Inverse queries are an optional part of the DNS.  Name servers are not
required to support any form of inverse queries.  If a name server
receives an inverse query that it does not support, it returns an error
response with the "Not Implemented" error set in the header.  While
inverse query support is optional, all name servers must be at least
able to return the error response.
queries reverse the mappings performed by standard query operations;
while a standard query maps a domain name to a resource, an inverse
query maps a resource to a domain name.  For example, a standard query
might bind a domain name to a host address; the corresponding inverse
query binds the host address to a domain name.
Inverse queries take the form of a single RR in the answer section of
the message, with an empty question section.  The owner name of the
query RR and its TTL are not significant.  The response carries
questions in the question section which identify all names possessing
the query RR WHICH THE NAME SERVER KNOWS.  Since no name server knows
about all of the domain name space, the response can never be assumed to
be complete.  Thus inverse queries are primarily useful for database
management and debugging activities.  Inverse queries are NOT an
acceptable method of mapping host addresses to host names; use the IN-
ADDR.ARPA domain instead.
Where possible, name servers should provide case-insensitive comparisons
for inverse queries.  Thus an inverse query asking for an MX RR of
"Venera.isi.edu" should get the same response as a query for
"VENERA.ISI.EDU"; an inverse query for HINFO RR "IBM-PC UNIX" should
produce the same result as an inverse query for "IBM-pc unix".  However,
this cannot be guaranteed because name servers may possess RRs that
contain character strings but the name server does not know that the
When a name server processes an inverse query, it either returns:
resource as QNAMEs in the question section
inverse mapping of the specified resource type.
When the response to an inverse query contains one or more QNAMEs, the
owner name and TTL of the RR in the answer section which defines the
inverse query is modified to exactly match an RR found at the first
RRs returned in the inverse queries cannot be cached using the same
mechanism as is used for the replies to standard queries.  One reason
for this is that a name might have multiple RRs of the same type, and
only one would appear.  For example, an inverse query for a single
address of a multiply homed host might create the impression that only
of an inverse query for retrieving the domain name that corresponds to
This query asks for a question whose answer is the Internet style
address 10.1.0.52.  Since the owner name is not known, any domain name
can be used as a placeholder (and is ignored).  A single octet of zero,
signifying the root, is usually used because it minimizes the length of
the message.  The TTL of the RR is not significant.  The response to
Question       |QTYPE=A, QCLASS=IN, QNAME=VENERA.ISI.EDU |
Note that the QTYPE in a response to an inverse query is the same as the
TYPE field in the answer section of the inverse query.  Responses to
inverse queries may contain multiple questions when the inverse is not
unique.  If the question section in the response is not empty, then the
RR in the answer section is modified to correspond to be an exact copy
of an RR at the first QNAME.
Name servers that support inverse queries can support these operations
through exhaustive searches of their databases, but this becomes
impractical as the size of the database increases.  An alternative
approach is to invert the database according to the search key.
For name servers that support multiple zones and a large amount of data,
the recommended approach is separate inversions for each zone.  When a
particular zone is changed during a refresh, only its inversions need to
Support for transfer of this type of inversion may be included in future
versions of the domain system, but is not supported in this version.
The optional completion services described in RFC-882 and RFC-883 have
been deleted.  Redesigned services may become available in the future.
The top levels of the recommended resolver algorithm are discussed in
[RFC-1034].  This section discusses implementation details assuming the
database structure suggested in the name server implementation section
The first step a resolver takes is to transform the client's request,
stated in a format suitable to the local OS, into a search specification
for RRs at a specific name which match a specific QTYPE and QCLASS.
Where possible, the QTYPE and QCLASS should correspond to a single type
and a single class, because this makes the use of cached data much
simpler.  The reason for this is that the presence of data of one type
in a cache doesn't confirm the existence or non-existence of data of
other types, hence the only way to be sure is to consult an
authoritative source.  If QCLASS=* is used, then authoritative answers
Since a resolver must be able to multiplex multiple requests if it is to
perform its function efficiently, each pending request is usually
represented in some block of state information.  This state block will
- A timestamp indicating the time the request began.
The timestamp is used to decide whether RRs in the database
can be used or are out of date.  This timestamp uses the
absolute time format previously discussed for RR storage in
zones and caches.  Note that when an RRs TTL indicates a
relative time, the RR must be timely, since it is part of a
zone.  When the RR has an absolute time, it is part of a
cache, and the TTL of the RR is compared against the timestamp
for the start of the request.
Note that using the timestamp is superior to using a current
time, since it allows RRs with TTLs of zero to be entered in
the cache in the usual manner, but still used by the current
request, even after intervals of many seconds due to system
load, query retransmission timeouts, etc.
- Some sort of parameters to limit the amount of work which will
be performed for this request.
The amount of work which a resolver will do in response to a
client request must be limited to guard against errors in the
database, such as circular CNAME references, and operational
problems, such as network partition which prevents the
resolver from accessing the name servers it needs.  While
local limits on the number of times a resolver will retransmit
a particular query to a particular name server address are
essential, the resolver should have a global per-request
counter to limit work on a single request.  The counter should
be set to some initial value and decremented whenever the
resolver performs any action (retransmission timeout,
retransmission, etc.)  If the counter passes zero, the request
is terminated with a temporary error.
Note that if the resolver structure allows one request to
start others in parallel, such as when the need to access a
name server for one request causes a parallel resolve for the
name server's addresses, the spawned request should be started
with a lower counter.  This prevents circular references in
the database from starting a chain reaction of resolver
- The SLIST data structure discussed in [RFC-1034].
This structure keeps track of the state of a request if it
must wait for answers from foreign name servers.
As described in [RFC-1034], the basic task of the resolver is to
formulate a query which will answer the client's request and direct that
query to name servers which can provide the information.  The resolver
will usually only have very strong hints about which servers to ask, in
the form of NS RRs, and may have to revise the query, in response to
CNAMEs, or revise the set of name servers the resolver is asking, in
response to delegation responses which point the resolver to name
servers closer to the desired information.  In addition to the
information requested by the client, the resolver may have to call upon
its own services to determine the address of name servers it wishes to
In any case, the model used in this memo assumes that the resolver is
multiplexing attention between multiple requests, some from the client,
and some internally generated.  Each request is represented by some
state information, and the desired behavior is that the resolver
transmit queries to name servers in a way that maximizes the probability
that the request is answered, minimizes the time that the request takes,
and avoids excessive transmissions.  The key algorithm uses the state
information of the request to select the next name server address to
query, and also computes a timeout which will cause the next action
should a response not arrive.  The next action will usually be a
transmission to some other server, but may be a temporary error to the
The resolver always starts with a list of server names to query (SLIST).
This list will be all NS RRs which correspond to the nearest ancestor
zone that the resolver knows about.  To avoid startup problems, the
resolver should have a set of default servers which it will ask should
it have no current NS RRs which are appropriate.  The resolver then adds
to SLIST all of the known addresses for the name servers, and may start
parallel requests to acquire the addresses of the servers when the
resolver has the name, but no addresses, for the name servers.
To complete initialization of SLIST, the resolver attaches whatever
history information it has to the each address in SLIST.  This will
usually consist of some sort of weighted averages for the response time
of the address, and the batting average of the address (i.e., how often
the address responded at all to the request).  Note that this
information should be kept on a per address basis, rather than on a per
name server basis, because the response time and batting average of a
particular server may vary considerably from address to address.  Note
also that this information is actually specific to a resolver address /
server address pair, so a resolver with multiple addresses may wish to
keep separate histories for each of its addresses.  Part of this step
must deal with addresses which have no such history; in this case an
expected round trip time of 5-10 seconds should be the worst case, with
lower estimates for the same local network, etc.
Note that whenever a delegation is followed, the resolver algorithm
The information establishes a partial ranking of the available name
server addresses.  Each time an address is chosen and the state should
be altered to prevent its selection again until all other addresses have
been tried.  The timeout for each transmission should be 50-100% greater
than the average predicted value to allow for variance in response.
- The resolver may encounter a situation where no addresses are
available for any of the name servers named in SLIST, and
where the servers in the list are precisely those which would
normally be used to look up their own addresses.  This
situation typically occurs when the glue address RRs have a
smaller TTL than the NS RRs marking delegation, or when the
resolver caches the result of a NS search.  The resolver
should detect this condition and restart the search at the
next ancestor zone, or alternatively at the root.
- If a resolver gets a server error or other bizarre response
from a name server, it should remove it from SLIST, and may
wish to schedule an immediate transmission to the next
candidate server address.
The first step in processing arriving response datagrams is to parse the
response.  This procedure should include:
- Check the header for reasonableness.  Discard datagrams which
are queries when responses are expected.
- Parse the sections of the message, and insure that all RRs are
- As an optional step, check the TTLs of arriving data looking
for RRs with excessively long TTLs.  If a RR has an
excessively long TTL, say greater than 1 week, either discard
the whole response, or limit all TTLs in the response to 1
The next step is to match the response to a current resolver request.
The recommended strategy is to do a preliminary matching using the ID
field in the domain header, and then to verify that the question section
corresponds to the information currently desired.  This requires that
the transmission algorithm devote several bits of the domain ID field to
a request identifier of some sort.  This step has several fine points:
- Some name servers send their responses from different
addresses than the one used to receive the query.  That is, a
resolver cannot rely that a response will come from the same
address which it sent the corresponding query to.  This name
server bug is typically encountered in UNIX systems.
- If the resolver retransmits a particular request to a name
server it should be able to use a response from any of the
transmissions.  However, if it is using the response to sample
the round trip time to access the name server, it must be able
to determine which transmission matches the response (and keep
transmission times for each outgoing message), or only
calculate round trip times based on initial transmissions.
- A name server will occasionally not have a current copy of a
zone which it should have according to some NS RRs.  The
resolver should simply remove the name server from the current
In general, we expect a resolver to cache all data which it receives in
responses since it may be useful in answering future client requests.
However, there are several types of data which should not be cached:
- When several RRs of the same type are available for a
particular owner name, the resolver should either cache them
all or none at all.  When a response is truncated, and a
resolver doesn't know whether it has a complete set, it should
not cache a possibly partial set of RRs.
- Cached data should never be used in preference to
authoritative data, so if caching would cause this to happen
the data should not be cached.
- The results of an inverse query should not be cached.
- The results of standard queries where the QNAME contains "*"
labels if the data might be used to construct wildcards.  The
reason is that the cache does not necessarily contain existing
RRs or zone boundary information which is necessary to
restrict the application of the wildcard RRs.
- RR data in responses of dubious reliability.  When a resolver
receives unsolicited responses or RR data other than that
requested, it should discard it without caching it.  The basic
implication is that all sanity checks on a packet should be
performed before any of it is cached.
In a similar vein, when a resolver has a set of RRs for some name in a
response, and wants to cache the RRs, it should check its cache for
already existing RRs.  Depending on the circumstances, either the data
in the response or the cache is preferred, but the two should never be
combined.  If the data in the response is from authoritative data in the
answer section, it is always preferred.
The domain system defines a standard for mapping mailboxes into domain
names, and two methods for using the mailbox information to derive mail
routing information.  The first method is called mail exchange binding
and the other method is mailbox binding.  The mailbox encoding standard
and mail exchange binding are part of the DNS official protocol, and are
the recommended method for mail routing in the Internet.  Mailbox
binding is an experimental feature which is still under development and
The mailbox encoding standard assumes a mailbox name of the form
"<local-part>@<mail-domain>".  While the syntax allowed in each of these
sections varies substantially between the various mail internets, the
preferred syntax for the ARPA Internet is given in [RFC-822].
The DNS encodes the <local-part> as a single label, and encodes the
<mail-domain> as a domain name.  The single label from the <local-part>
is prefaced to the domain name from <mail-domain> to form the domain
name corresponding to the mailbox.  Thus the mailbox HOSTMASTER@SRI-
NIC.ARPA is mapped into the domain name HOSTMASTER.SRI-NIC.ARPA.  If the
<local-part> contains dots or other special characters, its
representation in a master file will require the use of backslash
quoting to ensure that the domain name is properly encoded.  For
example, the mailbox Action.domains@ISI.EDU would be represented as
Mail exchange binding uses the <mail-domain> part of a mailbox
specification to determine where mail should be sent.  The <local-part>
is not even consulted.  [RFC-974] specifies this method in detail, and
should be consulted before attempting to use mail exchange support.
One of the advantages of this method is that it decouples mail
destination naming from the hosts used to support mail service, at the
cost of another layer of indirection in the lookup function.  However,
the addition layer should eliminate the need for complicated "%", "!",
etc encodings in <local-part>.
The essence of the method is that the <mail-domain> is used as a domain
name to locate type MX RRs which list hosts willing to accept mail for
<mail-domain>, together with preference values which rank the hosts
according to an order specified by the administrators for <mail-domain>.
In this memo, the <mail-domain> ISI.EDU is used in examples, together
with the hosts VENERA.ISI.EDU and VAXA.ISI.EDU as mail exchanges for
ISI.EDU.  If a mailer had a message for Mockapetris@ISI.EDU, it would
route it by looking up MX RRs for ISI.EDU.  The MX RRs at ISI.EDU name
VENERA.ISI.EDU and VAXA.ISI.EDU, and type A queries can find the host
In mailbox binding, the mailer uses the entire mail destination
specification to construct a domain name.  The encoded domain name for
the mailbox is used as the QNAME field in a QTYPE=MAILB query.
Several outcomes are possible for this query:
does not exist as a domain name.
In the long term, this would indicate that the specified
mailbox doesn't exist.  However, until the use of mailbox
binding is universal, this error condition should be
interpreted to mean that the organization identified by the
global part does not support mailbox binding.  The
appropriate procedure is to revert to exchange binding at
The MR RR carries new mailbox specification in its RDATA
field.  The mailer should replace the old mailbox with the
new one and retry the operation.
The MB RR carries a domain name for a host in its RDATA
field.  The mailer should deliver the message to that host
via whatever protocol is applicable, e.g., b,SMTP.
This condition means that the mailbox was actually a mailing
list or mail group, rather than a single mailbox.  Each MG RR
has a RDATA field that identifies a mailbox that is a member
of the group.  The mailer should deliver a copy of the
This condition means the the mailbox was actually a mailing
list.  The mailer can either deliver the message to the host
specified by the MB RR, which will in turn do the delivery to
all members, or the mailer can use the MG RRs to do the
In any of these cases, the response may include a Mail Information
(MINFO) RR.  This RR is usually associated with a mail group, but is
legal with a MB.  The MINFO RR identifies two mailboxes.  One of these
identifies a responsible person for the original mailbox name.  This
mailbox should be used for requests to be added to a mail group, etc.
The second mailbox name in the MINFO RR identifies a mailbox that should
receive error messages for mail failures.  This is particularly
appropriate for mailing lists when errors in member names should be
reported to a person other than the one who sends a message to the list.
New fields may be added to this RR in the future.
[Dyer 87]       S. Dyer, F. Hsu, "Hesiod", Project Athena
Describes the fundamentals of the Hesiod name service.
USC/Information Sciences Institute, August 1979.
A name service obsoleted by the Domain Name System, but
[Quarterman 86] J. Quarterman, and J. Hoskins, "Notable Computer Networks",
Communications of the ACM, October 1986, volume 29, number
[RFC-742]       K. Harrenstien, "NAME/FINGER", RFC-742, Network
Information Center, SRI International, December 1977.
USC/Information Sciences Institute, August 1980.
[RFC-799]       D. Mills, "Internet Name Domains", RFC-799, COMSAT,
Suggests introduction of a hierarchy in place of a flat
USC/Information Sciences Institute, February 1982.
[RFC-810]       E. Feinler, K. Harrenstien, Z. Su, and V. White, "DOD
Internet Host Table Specification", RFC-810, Network
Information Center, SRI International, March 1982.
[RFC-811]       K. Harrenstien, V. White, and E. Feinler, "Hostnames
Server", RFC-811, Network Information Center, SRI
Network Information Center, SRI International, March
Internet User Applications", RFC-819, Network
Early thoughts on the design of the domain system.
Current implementation is completely different.
[RFC-830]       Z. Su, "A Distributed System for Internet Name Service",
RFC-830, Network Information Center, SRI International,
[RFC-882]       P. Mockapetris, "Domain names - Concepts and
Facilities," RFC-882, USC/Information Sciences
[RFC-883]       P. Mockapetris, "Domain names - Implementation and
Specification," RFC-883, USC/Information Sciences
RFC-920, USC/Information Sciences Institute,
Explains the naming scheme for top level domains.
[RFC-952]       K. Harrenstien, M. Stahl, E. Feinler, "DoD Internet Host
Specifies the format of HOSTS.TXT, the host/address
[RFC-953]       K. Harrenstien, M. Stahl, E. Feinler, "HOSTNAME Server",
This RFC contains the official specification of the
hostname server protocol, which is obsoleted by the DNS.
This TCP based protocol accesses information stored in
the RFC-952 format, and is used to obtain copies of the
[RFC-973]       P. Mockapetris, "Domain System Changes and
Observations", RFC-973, USC/Information Sciences
Describes changes to RFC-882 and RFC-883 and reasons for
[RFC-974]       C. Partridge, "Mail routing and the domain system",
Describes the transition from HOSTS.TXT based mail
addressing to the more powerful MX system used with the
[RFC-1001]      NetBIOS Working Group, "Protocol standard for a NetBIOS
service on a TCP/UDP transport: Concepts and Methods",
This RFC and RFC-1002 are a preliminary design for
NETBIOS on top of TCP/IP which proposes to base NetBIOS
[RFC-1002]      NetBIOS Working Group, "Protocol standard for a NetBIOS
service on a TCP/UDP transport: Detailed
USC/Information Sciences Institute, May 1987.
Contains socket numbers and mnemonics for host names,
[RFC-1031]      W. Lazear, "MILNET Name Domain Transition", RFC-1031,
Describes a plan for converting the MILNET to the DNS.
[RFC-1032]      M. Stahl, "Establishing a Domain - Guidelines for
Describes the registration policies used by the NIC to
administer the top level domains and delegate subzones.
[RFC-1033]      M. Lottor, "Domain Administrators Operations Guide",
A cookbook for domain administrators.
[Solomon 82]    M. Solomon, L. Landweber, and D. Neuhengen, "The CSNET
Describes a name service for CSNET which is independent
This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for the
Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions for
improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the "Internet
Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the standardization state
and status of this protocol.  Distribution of this memo is unlimited.
Copyright (C) The Internet Society (1999).  All Rights Reserved.
The Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) is an application-level
protocol for distributed, collaborative, hypermedia information
systems. It is a generic, stateless, protocol which can be used for
many tasks beyond its use for hypertext, such as name servers and
distributed object management systems, through extension of its
request methods, error codes and headers [47]. A feature of HTTP is
the typing and negotiation of data representation, allowing systems
to be built independently of the data being transferred.
HTTP has been in use by the World-Wide Web global information
initiative since 1990. This specification defines the protocol
systems. HTTP has been in use by the World-Wide Web global
information initiative since 1990. The first version of HTTP,
referred to as HTTP/0.9, was a simple protocol for raw data transfer
across the Internet. HTTP/1.0, as defined by RFC 1945 [6], improved
the protocol by allowing messages to be in the format of MIME-like
messages, containing metainformation about the data transferred and
modifiers on the request/response semantics. However, HTTP/1.0 does
not sufficiently take into consideration the effects of hierarchical
proxies, caching, the need for persistent connections, or virtual
hosts. In addition, the proliferation of incompletely-implemented
applications calling themselves "HTTP/1.0" has necessitated a
protocol version change in order for two communicating applications
to determine each other's true capabilities.
This specification defines the protocol referred to as "HTTP/1.1".
This protocol includes more stringent requirements than HTTP/1.0 in
order to ensure reliable implementation of its features.
Practical information systems require more functionality than simple
retrieval, including search, front-end update, and annotation. HTTP
allows an open-ended set of methods and headers that indicate the
purpose of a request [47]. It builds on the discipline of reference
provided by the Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) [3], as a location
(URL) [4] or name (URN) [20], for indicating the resource to which a
method is to be applied. Messages are passed in a format similar to
that used by Internet mail [9] as defined by the Multipurpose
Internet Mail Extensions (MIME) [7].
HTTP is also used as a generic protocol for communication between
user agents and proxies/gateways to other Internet systems, including
and WAIS [10] protocols. In this way, HTTP allows basic hypermedia
access to resources available from diverse applications.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [34].
An implementation is not compliant if it fails to satisfy one or more
of the MUST or REQUIRED level requirements for the protocols it
implements. An implementation that satisfies all the MUST or REQUIRED
level and all the SHOULD level requirements for its protocols is said
to be "unconditionally compliant"; one that satisfies all the MUST
level requirements but not all the SHOULD level requirements for its
protocols is said to be "conditionally compliant."
This specification uses a number of terms to refer to the roles
played by participants in, and objects of, the HTTP communication.
A transport layer virtual circuit established between two programs
for the purpose of communication.
The basic unit of HTTP communication, consisting of a structured
sequence of octets matching the syntax defined in section 4 and
transmitted via the connection.
An HTTP request message, as defined in section 5.
An HTTP response message, as defined in section 6.
A network data object or service that can be identified by a URI,
as defined in section 3.2. Resources may be available in multiple
representations (e.g. multiple languages, data formats, size, and
resolutions) or vary in other ways.
The information transferred as the payload of a request or
response. An entity consists of metainformation in the form of
entity-header fields and content in the form of an entity-body, as
An entity included with a response that is subject to content
negotiation, as described in section 12. There may exist multiple
representations associated with a particular response status.
The mechanism for selecting the appropriate representation when
servicing a request, as described in section 12. The
representation of entities in any response can be negotiated
(including error responses).
A resource may have one, or more than one, representation(s)
associated with it at any given instant. Each of these
representations is termed a `varriant'.  Use of the term `variant'
does not necessarily imply that the resource is subject to content
A program that establishes connections for the purpose of sending
The client which initiates a request. These are often browsers,
editors, spiders (web-traversing robots), or other end user tools.
An application program that accepts connections in order to
service requests by sending back responses. Any given program may
be capable of being both a client and a server; our use of these
terms refers only to the role being performed by the program for a
particular connection, rather than to the program's capabilities
in general. Likewise, any server may act as an origin server,
proxy, gateway, or tunnel, switching behavior based on the nature
The server on which a given resource resides or is to be created.
An intermediary program which acts as both a server and a client
for the purpose of making requests on behalf of other clients.
Requests are serviced internally or by passing them on, with
possible translation, to other servers. A proxy MUST implement
both the client and server requirements of this specification. A
"transparent proxy" is a proxy that does not modify the request or
response beyond what is required for proxy authentication and
identification. A "non-transparent proxy" is a proxy that modifies
the request or response in order to provide some added service to
the user agent, such as group annotation services, media type
transformation, protocol reduction, or anonymity filtering. Except
where either transparent or non-transparent behavior is explicitly
stated, the HTTP proxy requirements apply to both types of
A server which acts as an intermediary for some other server.
Unlike a proxy, a gateway receives requests as if it were the
origin server for the requested resource; the requesting client
may not be aware that it is communicating with a gateway.
An intermediary program which is acting as a blind relay between
two connections. Once active, a tunnel is not considered a party
to the HTTP communication, though the tunnel may have been
initiated by an HTTP request. The tunnel ceases to exist when both
ends of the relayed connections are closed.
A program's local store of response messages and the subsystem
that controls its message storage, retrieval, and deletion. A
cache stores cacheable responses in order to reduce the response
time and network bandwidth consumption on future, equivalent
requests. Any client or server may include a cache, though a cache
cannot be used by a server that is acting as a tunnel.
A response is cacheable if a cache is allowed to store a copy of
the response message for use in answering subsequent requests. The
rules for determining the cacheability of HTTP responses are
defined in section 13. Even if a resource is cacheable, there may
be additional constraints on whether a cache can use the cached
copy for a particular request.
A response is first-hand if it comes directly and without
unnecessary delay from the origin server, perhaps via one or more
proxies. A response is also first-hand if its validity has just
been checked directly with the origin server.
explicit expiration time
The time at which the origin server intends that an entity should
no longer be returned by a cache without further validation.
heuristic expiration time
An expiration time assigned by a cache when no explicit expiration
The age of a response is the time since it was sent by, or
successfully validated with, the origin server.
The length of time between the generation of a response and its
A response is fresh if its age has not yet exceeded its freshness
A response is stale if its age has passed its freshness lifetime.
semantically transparent
A cache behaves in a "semantically transparent" manner, with
respect to a particular response, when its use affects neither the
requesting client nor the origin server, except to improve
performance. When a cache is semantically transparent, the client
receives exactly the same response (except for hop-by-hop headers)
that it would have received had its request been handled directly
A protocol element (e.g., an entity tag or a Last-Modified time)
that is used to find out whether a cache entry is an equivalent
Upstream and downstream describe the flow of a message: all
messages flow from upstream to downstream.
Inbound and outbound refer to the request and response paths for
messages: "inbound" means "traveling toward the origin server",
and "outbound" means "traveling toward the user agent"
The HTTP protocol is a request/response protocol. A client sends a
request to the server in the form of a request method, URI, and
protocol version, followed by a MIME-like message containing request
modifiers, client information, and possible body content over a
connection with a server. The server responds with a status line,
including the message's protocol version and a success or error code,
followed by a MIME-like message containing server information, entity
metainformation, and possible entity-body content. The relationship
between HTTP and MIME is described in appendix 19.4.
Most HTTP communication is initiated by a user agent and consists of
a request to be applied to a resource on some origin server. In the
simplest case, this may be accomplished via a single connection (v)
between the user agent (UA) and the origin server (O).
A more complicated situation occurs when one or more intermediaries
are present in the request/response chain. There are three common
forms of intermediary: proxy, gateway, and tunnel. A proxy is a
forwarding agent, receiving requests for a URI in its absolute form,
rewriting all or part of the message, and forwarding the reformatted
request toward the server identified by the URI. A gateway is a
receiving agent, acting as a layer above some other server(s) and, if
necessary, translating the requests to the underlying server's
protocol. A tunnel acts as a relay point between two connections
without changing the messages; tunnels are used when the
communication needs to pass through an intermediary (such as a
firewall) even when the intermediary cannot understand the contents
The figure above shows three intermediaries (A, B, and C) between the
user agent and origin server. A request or response message that
travels the whole chain will pass through four separate connections.
This distinction is important because some HTTP communication options
may apply only to the connection with the nearest, non-tunnel
neighbor, only to the end-points of the chain, or to all connections
along the chain. Although the diagram is linear, each participant may
be engaged in multiple, simultaneous communications. For example, B
may be receiving requests from many clients other than A, and/or
forwarding requests to servers other than C, at the same time that it
Any party to the communication which is not acting as a tunnel may
employ an internal cache for handling requests. The effect of a cache
is that the request/response chain is shortened if one of the
participants along the chain has a cached response applicable to that
request. The following illustrates the resulting chain if B has a
cached copy of an earlier response from O (via C) for a request which
has not been cached by UA or A.
Not all responses are usefully cacheable, and some requests may
contain modifiers which place special requirements on cache behavior.
HTTP requirements for cache behavior and cacheable responses are
In fact, there are a wide variety of architectures and configurations
of caches and proxies currently being experimented with or deployed
across the World Wide Web. These systems include national hierarchies
of proxy caches to save transoceanic bandwidth, systems that
broadcast or multicast cache entries, organizations that distribute
subsets of cached data via CD-ROM, and so on. HTTP systems are used
in corporate intranets over high-bandwidth links, and for access via
PDAs with low-power radio links and intermittent connectivity. The
goal of HTTP/1.1 is to support the wide diversity of configurations
already deployed while introducing protocol constructs that meet the
needs of those who build web applications that require high
reliability and, failing that, at least reliable indications of
HTTP communication usually takes place over TCP/IP connections. The
default port is TCP 80 [19], but other ports can be used. This does
not preclude HTTP from being implemented on top of any other protocol
on the Internet, or on other networks. HTTP only presumes a reliable
transport; any protocol that provides such guarantees can be used;
the mapping of the HTTP/1.1 request and response structures onto the
transport data units of the protocol in question is outside the scope
In HTTP/1.0, most implementations used a new connection for each
request/response exchange. In HTTP/1.1, a connection may be used for
one or more request/response exchanges, although connections may be
closed for a variety of reasons (see section 8.1).
All of the mechanisms specified in this document are described in
both prose and an augmented Backus-Naur Form (BNF) similar to that
used by RFC 822 [9]. Implementors will need to be familiar with the
notation in order to understand this specification. The augmented BNF
includes the following constructs:
The name of a rule is simply the name itself (without any
enclosing "<" and ">") and is separated from its definition by the
equal "=" character. White space is only significant in that
indentation of continuation lines is used to indicate a rule
definition that spans more than one line. Certain basic rules are
in uppercase, such as SP, LWS, HT, CRLF, DIGIT, ALPHA, etc. Angle
brackets are used within definitions whenever their presence will
facilitate discerning the use of rule names.
Quotation marks surround literal text. Unless stated otherwise,
the text is case-insensitive.
Elements separated by a bar ("|") are alternatives, e.g., "yes |
Elements enclosed in parentheses are treated as a single element.
Thus, "(elem (foo | bar) elem)" allows the token sequences "elem
foo elem" and "elem bar elem".
The character "*" preceding an element indicates repetition. The
full form is "<n>*<m>element" indicating at least <n> and at most
<m> occurrences of element. Default values are 0 and infinity so
that "*(element)" allows any number, including zero; "1*element"
requires at least one; and "1*2element" allows one or two.
Square brackets enclose optional elements; "[foo bar]" is
Specific repetition: "<n>(element)" is equivalent to
"<n>*<n>(element)"; that is, exactly <n> occurrences of (element).
Thus 2DIGIT is a 2-digit number, and 3ALPHA is a string of three
alphabetic characters.
A construct "#" is defined, similar to "*", for defining lists of
elements. The full form is "<n>#<m>element" indicating at least
<n> and at most <m> elements, each separated by one or more commas
(",") and OPTIONAL linear white space (LWS). This makes the usual
form of lists very easy; a rule such as
Wherever this construct is used, null elements are allowed, but do
not contribute to the count of elements present. That is,
"(element), , (element) " is permitted, but counts as only two
elements. Therefore, where at least one element is required, at
least one non-null element MUST be present. Default values are 0
and infinity so that "#element" allows any number, including zero;
"1#element" requires at least one; and "1#2element" allows one or
A semi-colon, set off some distance to the right of rule text,
starts a comment that continues to the end of line. This is a
simple way of including useful notes in parallel with the
The grammar described by this specification is word-based. Except
where noted otherwise, linear white space (LWS) can be included
between any two adjacent words (token or quoted-string), and
between adjacent words and separators, without changing the
interpretation of a field. At least one delimiter (LWS and/or
separators) MUST exist between any two tokens (for the definition
of "token" below), since they would otherwise be interpreted as a
The following rules are used throughout this specification to
describe basic parsing constructs. The US-ASCII coded character set
HTTP/1.1 defines the sequence CR LF as the end-of-line marker for all
protocol elements except the entity-body (see appendix 19.3 for
tolerant applications). The end-of-line marker within an entity-body
is defined by its associated media type, as described in section 3.7.
HTTP/1.1 header field values can be folded onto multiple lines if the
continuation line begins with a space or horizontal tab. All linear
white space, including folding, has the same semantics as SP. A
recipient MAY replace any linear white space with a single SP before
interpreting the field value or forwarding the message downstream.
The TEXT rule is only used for descriptive field contents and values
that are not intended to be interpreted by the message parser. Words
of *TEXT MAY contain characters from character sets other than ISO-
8859-1 [22] only when encoded according to the rules of RFC 2047
A CRLF is allowed in the definition of TEXT only as part of a header
field continuation. It is expected that the folding LWS will be
replaced with a single SP before interpretation of the TEXT value.
Hexadecimal numeric characters are used in several protocol elements.
Many HTTP/1.1 header field values consist of words separated by LWS
or special characters. These special characters MUST be in a quoted
string to be used within a parameter value (as defined in section
Comments can be included in some HTTP header fields by surrounding
the comment text with parentheses. Comments are only allowed in
fields containing "comment" as part of their field value definition.
In all other fields, parentheses are considered part of the field
A string of text is parsed as a single word if it is quoted using
The backslash character ("\") MAY be used as a single-character
quoting mechanism only within quoted-string and comment constructs.
HTTP uses a "<major>.<minor>" numbering scheme to indicate versions
of the protocol. The protocol versioning policy is intended to allow
the sender to indicate the format of a message and its capacity for
understanding further HTTP communication, rather than the features
obtained via that communication. No change is made to the version
number for the addition of message components which do not affect
communication behavior or which only add to extensible field values.
The <minor> number is incremented when the changes made to the
protocol add features which do not change the general message parsing
algorithm, but which may add to the message semantics and imply
additional capabilities of the sender. The <major> number is
incremented when the format of a message within the protocol is
changed. See RFC 2145 [36] for a fuller explanation.
The version of an HTTP message is indicated by an HTTP-Version field
in the first line of the message.
Note that the major and minor numbers MUST be treated as separate
integers and that each MAY be incremented higher than a single digit.
Thus, HTTP/2.4 is a lower version than HTTP/2.13, which in turn is
lower than HTTP/12.3. Leading zeros MUST be ignored by recipients and
An application that sends a request or response message that includes
HTTP-Version of "HTTP/1.1" MUST be at least conditionally compliant
with this specification. Applications that are at least conditionally
compliant with this specification SHOULD use an HTTP-Version of
"HTTP/1.1" in their messages, and MUST do so for any message that is
not compatible with HTTP/1.0. For more details on when to send
specific HTTP-Version values, see RFC 2145 [36].
The HTTP version of an application is the highest HTTP version for
which the application is at least conditionally compliant.
Proxy and gateway applications need to be careful when forwarding
messages in protocol versions different from that of the application.
Since the protocol version indicates the protocol capability of the
sender, a proxy/gateway MUST NOT send a message with a version
indicator which is greater than its actual version. If a higher
version request is received, the proxy/gateway MUST either downgrade
the request version, or respond with an error, or switch to tunnel
Due to interoperability problems with HTTP/1.0 proxies discovered
since the publication of RFC 2068[33], caching proxies MUST, gateways
MAY, and tunnels MUST NOT upgrade the request to the highest version
they support. The proxy/gateway's response to that request MUST be in
the same major version as the request.
Note: Converting between versions of HTTP may involve modification
of header fields required or forbidden by the versions involved.
URIs have been known by many names: WWW addresses, Universal Document
Identifiers, Universal Resource Identifiers [3], and finally the
combination of Uniform Resource Locators (URL) [4] and Names (URN)
[20]. As far as HTTP is concerned, Uniform Resource Identifiers are
simply formatted strings which identify--via name, location, or any
other characteristic--a resource.
URIs in HTTP can be represented in absolute form or relative to some
known base URI [11], depending upon the context of their use. The two
forms are differentiated by the fact that absolute URIs always begin
with a scheme name followed by a colon. For definitive information on
URL syntax and semantics, see "Uniform Resource Identifiers (URI):
Generic Syntax and Semantics," RFC 2396 [42] (which replaces RFCs
definitions of "URI-reference", "absoluteURI", "relativeURI", "port",
"host","abs_path", "rel_path", and "authority" from that
The HTTP protocol does not place any a priori limit on the length of
a URI. Servers MUST be able to handle the URI of any resource they
serve, and SHOULD be able to handle URIs of unbounded length if they
provide GET-based forms that could generate such URIs. A server
SHOULD return 414 (Request-URI Too Long) status if a URI is longer
than the server can handle (see section 10.4.15).
Note: Servers ought to be cautious about depending on URI lengths
above 255 bytes, because some older client or proxy
implementations might not properly support these lengths.
The "http" scheme is used to locate network resources via the HTTP
protocol. This section defines the scheme-specific syntax and
semantics for http URLs.
If the port is empty or not given, port 80 is assumed. The semantics
are that the identified resource is located at the server listening
for TCP connections on that port of that host, and the Request-URI
for the resource is abs_path (section 5.1.2). The use of IP addresses
in URLs SHOULD be avoided whenever possible (see RFC 1900 [24]). If
the abs_path is not present in the URL, it MUST be given as "/" when
used as a Request-URI for a resource (section 5.1.2). If a proxy
receives a host name which is not a fully qualified domain name, it
MAY add its domain to the host name it received. If a proxy receives
a fully qualified domain name, the proxy MUST NOT change the host
When comparing two URIs to decide if they match or not, a client
SHOULD use a case-sensitive octet-by-octet comparison of the entire
URIs, with these exceptions:
- A port that is empty or not given is equivalent to the default
port for that URI-reference;
- Comparisons of host names MUST be case-insensitive;
- Comparisons of scheme names MUST be case-insensitive;
- An empty abs_path is equivalent to an abs_path of "/".
Characters other than those in the "reserved" and "unsafe" sets (see
RFC 2396 [42]) are equivalent to their ""%" HEX HEX" encoding.
For example, the following three URIs are equivalent:
http://abc.com:80/~smith/home.html
http://ABC.com/%7Esmith/home.html
http://ABC.com:/%7esmith/home.html
HTTP applications have historically allowed three different formats
for the representation of date/time stamps:
The first format is preferred as an Internet standard and represents
a fixed-length subset of that defined by RFC 1123 [8] (an update to
RFC 822 [9]). The second format is in common use, but is based on the
obsolete RFC 850 [12] date format and lacks a four-digit year.
HTTP/1.1 clients and servers that parse the date value MUST accept
all three formats (for compatibility with HTTP/1.0), though they MUST
only generate the RFC 1123 format for representing HTTP-date values
in header fields. See section 19.3 for further information.
Note: Recipients of date values are encouraged to be robust in
accepting date values that may have been sent by non-HTTP
applications, as is sometimes the case when retrieving or posting
messages via proxies/gateways to SMTP or NNTP.
All HTTP date/time stamps MUST be represented in Greenwich Mean Time
(GMT), without exception. For the purposes of HTTP, GMT is exactly
equal to UTC (Coordinated Universal Time). This is indicated in the
first two formats by the inclusion of "GMT" as the three-letter
abbreviation for time zone, and MUST be assumed when reading the
asctime format. HTTP-date is case sensitive and MUST NOT include
additional LWS beyond that specifically included as SP in the
asctime-date = wkday SP date3 SP time SP 4DIGIT
Note: HTTP requirements for the date/time stamp format apply only
to their usage within the protocol stream. Clients and servers are
not required to use these formats for user presentation, request
Some HTTP header fields allow a time value to be specified as an
integer number of seconds, represented in decimal, after the time
that the message was received.
HTTP uses the same definition of the term "character set" as that
The term "character set" is used in this document to refer to a
method used with one or more tables to convert a sequence of octets
into a sequence of characters. Note that unconditional conversion in
the other direction is not required, in that not all characters may
be available in a given character set and a character set may provide
more than one sequence of octets to represent a particular character.
This definition is intended to allow various kinds of character
encoding, from simple single-table mappings such as US-ASCII to
complex table switching methods such as those that use ISO-2022's
techniques. However, the definition associated with a MIME character
set name MUST fully specify the mapping to be performed from octets
to characters. In particular, use of external profiling information
to determine the exact mapping is not permitted.
Note: This use of the term "character set" is more commonly
referred to as a "character encoding." However, since HTTP and
MIME share the same registry, it is important that the terminology
HTTP character sets are identified by case-insensitive tokens. The
complete set of tokens is defined by the IANA Character Set registry
Although HTTP allows an arbitrary token to be used as a charset
value, any token that has a predefined value within the IANA
Character Set registry [19] MUST represent the character set defined
by that registry. Applications SHOULD limit their use of character
sets to those defined by the IANA registry.
Implementors should be aware of IETF character set requirements [38]
Some HTTP/1.0 software has interpreted a Content-Type header without
charset parameter incorrectly to mean "recipient should guess."
Senders wishing to defeat this behavior MAY include a charset
parameter even when the charset is ISO-8859-1 and SHOULD do so when
it is known that it will not confuse the recipient.
Unfortunately, some older HTTP/1.0 clients did not deal properly with
an explicit charset parameter. HTTP/1.1 recipients MUST respect the
charset label provided by the sender; and those user agents that have
a provision to "guess" a charset MUST use the charset from the
content-type field if they support that charset, rather than the
recipient's preference, when initially displaying a document. See
Content coding values indicate an encoding transformation that has
been or can be applied to an entity. Content codings are primarily
used to allow a document to be compressed or otherwise usefully
transformed without losing the identity of its underlying media type
and without loss of information. Frequently, the entity is stored in
coded form, transmitted directly, and only decoded by the recipient.
All content-coding values are case-insensitive. HTTP/1.1 uses
content-coding values in the Accept-Encoding (section 14.3) and
Content-Encoding (section 14.11) header fields. Although the value
describes the content-coding, what is more important is that it
indicates what decoding mechanism will be required to remove the
The Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) acts as a registry for
content-coding value tokens. Initially, the registry contains the
gzip An encoding format produced by the file compression program
The encoding format produced by the common UNIX file compression
program "compress". This format is an adaptive Lempel-Ziv-Welch
Use of program names for the identification of encoding formats
is not desirable and is discouraged for future encodings. Their
use here is representative of historical practice, not good
design. For compatibility with previous implementations of HTTP,
applications SHOULD consider "x-gzip" and "x-compress" to be
equivalent to "gzip" and "compress" respectively.
The "zlib" format defined in RFC 1950 [31] in combination with
the "deflate" compression mechanism described in RFC 1951 [29].
The default (identity) encoding; the use of no transformation
whatsoever. This content-coding is used only in the Accept-
Encoding header, and SHOULD NOT be used in the Content-Encoding
New content-coding value tokens SHOULD be registered; to allow
interoperability between clients and servers, specifications of the
content coding algorithms needed to implement a new value SHOULD be
publicly available and adequate for independent implementation, and
conform to the purpose of content coding defined in this section.
Transfer-coding values are used to indicate an encoding
transformation that has been, can be, or may need to be applied to an
entity-body in order to ensure "safe transport" through the network.
This differs from a content coding in that the transfer-coding is a
property of the message, not of the original entity.
transfer-coding         = "chunked" | transfer-extension
Parameters are in  the form of attribute/value pairs.
All transfer-coding values are case-insensitive. HTTP/1.1 uses
transfer-coding values in the TE header field (section 14.39) and in
the Transfer-Encoding header field (section 14.41).
Whenever a transfer-coding is applied to a message-body, the set of
transfer-codings MUST include "chunked", unless the message is
terminated by closing the connection. When the "chunked" transfer-
coding is used, it MUST be the last transfer-coding applied to the
message-body. The "chunked" transfer-coding MUST NOT be applied more
than once to a message-body. These rules allow the recipient to
determine the transfer-length of the message (section 4.4).
Transfer-codings are analogous to the Content-Transfer-Encoding
values of MIME [7], which were designed to enable safe transport of
binary data over a 7-bit transport service. However, safe transport
has a different focus for an 8bit-clean transfer protocol. In HTTP,
the only unsafe characteristic of message-bodies is the difficulty in
determining the exact body length (section 7.2.2), or the desire to
encrypt data over a shared transport.
transfer-coding value tokens. Initially, the registry contains the
following tokens: "chunked" (section 3.6.1), "identity" (section
New transfer-coding value tokens SHOULD be registered in the same way
as new content-coding value tokens (section 3.5).
A server which receives an entity-body with a transfer-coding it does
not understand SHOULD return 501 (Unimplemented), and close the
connection. A server MUST NOT send transfer-codings to an HTTP/1.0
The chunked encoding modifies the body of a message in order to
transfer it as a series of chunks, each with its own size indicator,
followed by an OPTIONAL trailer containing entity-header fields. This
allows dynamically produced content to be transferred along with the
information necessary for the recipient to verify that it has
received the full message.
chunk-ext-val  = token | quoted-string
chunk-data     = chunk-size(OCTET)
The chunk-size field is a string of hex digits indicating the size of
the chunk. The chunked encoding is ended by any chunk whose size is
zero, followed by the trailer, which is terminated by an empty line.
The trailer allows the sender to include additional HTTP header
fields at the end of the message. The Trailer header field can be
used to indicate which header fields are included in a trailer (see
A server using chunked transfer-coding in a response MUST NOT use the
trailer for any header fields unless at least one of the following is
a)the request included a TE header field that indicates "trailers" is
acceptable in the transfer-coding of the  response, as described in
b)the server is the origin server for the response, the trailer
fields consist entirely of optional metadata, and the recipient
could use the message (in a manner acceptable to the origin server)
without receiving this metadata.  In other words, the origin server
is willing to accept the possibility that the trailer fields might
be silently discarded along the path to the client.
This requirement prevents an interoperability failure when the
message is being received by an HTTP/1.1 (or later) proxy and
forwarded to an HTTP/1.0 recipient. It avoids a situation where
compliance with the protocol would have necessitated a possibly
infinite buffer on the proxy.
An example process for decoding a Chunked-Body is presented in
All HTTP/1.1 applications MUST be able to receive and decode the
"chunked" transfer-coding, and MUST ignore chunk-extension extensions
HTTP uses Internet Media Types [17] in the Content-Type (section
14.17) and Accept (section 14.1) header fields in order to provide
open and extensible data typing and type negotiation.
Parameters MAY follow the type/subtype in the form of attribute/value
pairs (as defined in section 3.6).
The type, subtype, and parameter attribute names are case-
insensitive. Parameter values might or might not be case-sensitive,
depending on the semantics of the parameter name. Linear white space
(LWS) MUST NOT be used between the type and subtype, nor between an
attribute and its value. The presence or absence of a parameter might
be significant to the processing of a media-type, depending on its
definition within the media type registry.
Note that some older HTTP applications do not recognize media type
parameters. When sending data to older HTTP applications,
implementations SHOULD only use media type parameters when they are
required by that type/subtype definition.
Media-type values are registered with the Internet Assigned Number
Authority (IANA [19]). The media type registration process is
outlined in RFC 1590 [17]. Use of non-registered media types is
Internet media types are registered with a canonical form. An
entity-body transferred via HTTP messages MUST be represented in the
appropriate canonical form prior to its transmission except for
"text" types, as defined in the next paragraph.
When in canonical form, media subtypes of the "text" type use CRLF as
the text line break. HTTP relaxes this requirement and allows the
transport of text media with plain CR or LF alone representing a line
break when it is done consistently for an entire entity-body. HTTP
applications MUST accept CRLF, bare CR, and bare LF as being
representative of a line break in text media received via HTTP. In
addition, if the text is represented in a character set that does not
use octets 13 and 10 for CR and LF respectively, as is the case for
some multi-byte character sets, HTTP allows the use of whatever octet
sequences are defined by that character set to represent the
equivalent of CR and LF for line breaks. This flexibility regarding
line breaks applies only to text media in the entity-body; a bare CR
or LF MUST NOT be substituted for CRLF within any of the HTTP control
structures (such as header fields and multipart boundaries).
If an entity-body is encoded with a content-coding, the underlying
data MUST be in a form defined above prior to being encoded.
The "charset" parameter is used with some media types to define the
character set (section 3.4) of the data. When no explicit charset
parameter is provided by the sender, media subtypes of the "text"
type are defined to have a default charset value of "ISO-8859-1" when
received via HTTP. Data in character sets other than "ISO-8859-1" or
its subsets MUST be labeled with an appropriate charset value. See
section 3.4.1 for compatibility problems.
MIME provides for a number of "multipart" types -- encapsulations of
one or more entities within a single message-body. All multipart
types share a common syntax, as defined in section 5.1.1 of RFC 2046
[40], and MUST include a boundary parameter as part of the media type
value. The message body is itself a protocol element and MUST
therefore use only CRLF to represent line breaks between body-parts.
Unlike in RFC 2046, the epilogue of any multipart message MUST be
empty; HTTP applications MUST NOT transmit the epilogue (even if the
original multipart contains an epilogue). These restrictions exist in
order to preserve the self-delimiting nature of a multipart message-
body, wherein the "end" of the message-body is indicated by the
ending multipart boundary.
In general, HTTP treats a multipart message-body no differently than
any other media type: strictly as payload. The one exception is the
"multipart/byteranges" type (appendix 19.2) when it appears in a 206
(Partial Content) response, which will be interpreted by some HTTP
caching mechanisms as described in sections 13.5.4 and 14.16. In all
other cases, an HTTP user agent SHOULD follow the same or similar
behavior as a MIME user agent would upon receipt of a multipart type.
The MIME header fields within each body-part of a multipart message-
body do not have any significance to HTTP beyond that defined by
In general, an HTTP user agent SHOULD follow the same or similar
If an application receives an unrecognized multipart subtype, the
application MUST treat it as being equivalent to "multipart/mixed".
Note: The "multipart/form-data" type has been specifically defined
for carrying form data suitable for processing via the POST
request method, as described in RFC 1867 [15].
Product tokens are used to allow communicating applications to
identify themselves by software name and version. Most fields using
product tokens also allow sub-products which form a significant part
of the application to be listed, separated by white space. By
convention, the products are listed in order of their significance
for identifying the application.
Product tokens SHOULD be short and to the point. They MUST NOT be
used for advertising or other non-essential information. Although any
token character MAY appear in a product-version, this token SHOULD
only be used for a version identifier (i.e., successive versions of
the same product SHOULD only differ in the product-version portion of
HTTP content negotiation (section 12) uses short "floating point"
numbers to indicate the relative importance ("weight") of various
negotiable parameters.  A weight is normalized to a real number in
the range 0 through 1, where 0 is the minimum and 1 the maximum
value. If a parameter has a quality value of 0, then content with
this parameter is `not acceptable' for the client. HTTP/1.1
applications MUST NOT generate more than three digits after the
decimal point. User configuration of these values SHOULD also be
limited in this fashion.
"Quality values" is a misnomer, since these values merely represent
relative degradation in desired quality.
A language tag identifies a natural language spoken, written, or
otherwise conveyed by human beings for communication of information
to other human beings. Computer languages are explicitly excluded.
HTTP uses language tags within the Accept-Language and Content-
The syntax and registry of HTTP language tags is the same as that
defined by RFC 1766 [1]. In summary, a language tag is composed of 1
or more parts: A primary language tag and a possibly empty series of
White space is not allowed within the tag and all tags are case-
insensitive. The name space of language tags is administered by the
IANA. Example tags include:
en, en-US, en-cockney, i-cherokee, x-pig-latin
where any two-letter primary-tag is an ISO-639 language abbreviation
and any two-letter initial subtag is an ISO-3166 country code. (The
last three tags above are not registered tags; all but the last are
examples of tags which could be registered in future.)
Entity tags are used for comparing two or more entities from the same
requested resource. HTTP/1.1 uses entity tags in the ETag (section
If-Range (section 14.27) header fields. The definition of how they
are used and compared as cache validators is in section 13.3.3. An
entity tag consists of an opaque quoted string, possibly prefixed by
entity-tag = [ weak ] opaque-tag
opaque-tag = quoted-string
A "strong entity tag" MAY be shared by two entities of a resource
only if they are equivalent by octet equality.
A "weak entity tag," indicated by the "W/" prefix, MAY be shared by
two entities of a resource only if the entities are equivalent and
could be substituted for each other with no significant change in
semantics. A weak entity tag can only be used for weak comparison.
An entity tag MUST be unique across all versions of all entities
associated with a particular resource. A given entity tag value MAY
be used for entities obtained by requests on different URIs. The use
of the same entity tag value in conjunction with entities obtained by
requests on different URIs does not imply the equivalence of those
HTTP/1.1 allows a client to request that only part (a range of) the
response entity be included within the response. HTTP/1.1 uses range
units in the Range (section 14.35) and Content-Range (section 14.16)
header fields. An entity can be broken down into subranges according
to various structural units.
range-unit       = bytes-unit | other-range-unit
The only range unit defined by HTTP/1.1 is "bytes". HTTP/1.1
implementations MAY ignore ranges specified using other units.
HTTP/1.1 has been designed to allow implementations of applications
that do not depend on knowledge of ranges.
HTTP messages consist of requests from client to server and responses
HTTP-message   = Request | Response     ; HTTP/1.1 messages
Request (section 5) and Response (section 6) messages use the generic
message format of RFC 822 [9] for transferring entities (the payload
of the message). Both types of message consist of a start-line, zero
or more header fields (also known as "headers"), an empty line (i.e.,
a line with nothing preceding the CRLF) indicating the end of the
header fields, and possibly a message-body.
generic-message = start-line
start-line      = Request-Line | Status-Line
In the interest of robustness, servers SHOULD ignore any empty
line(s) received where a Request-Line is expected. In other words, if
the server is reading the protocol stream at the beginning of a
message and receives a CRLF first, it should ignore the CRLF.
Certain buggy HTTP/1.0 client implementations generate extra CRLF's
after a POST request. To restate what is explicitly forbidden by the
BNF, an HTTP/1.1 client MUST NOT preface or follow a request with an
HTTP header fields, which include general-header (section 4.5),
request-header (section 5.3), response-header (section 6.2), and
entity-header (section 7.1) fields, follow the same generic format as
that given in Section 3.1 of RFC 822 [9]. Each header field consists
of a name followed by a colon (":") and the field value. Field names
are case-insensitive. The field value MAY be preceded by any amount
of LWS, though a single SP is preferred. Header fields can be
extended over multiple lines by preceding each extra line with at
least one SP or HT. Applications ought to follow "common form", where
one is known or indicated, when generating HTTP constructs, since
there might exist some implementations that fail to accept anything
beyond the common forms.
message-header = field-name ":" [ field-value ]
field-content  = <the OCTETs making up the field-value
and consisting of either *TEXT or combinations
The field-content does not include any leading or trailing LWS:
linear white space occurring before the first non-whitespace
character of the field-value or after the last non-whitespace
character of the field-value. Such leading or trailing LWS MAY be
removed without changing the semantics of the field value. Any LWS
that occurs between field-content MAY be replaced with a single SP
before interpreting the field value or forwarding the message
The order in which header fields with differing field names are
received is not significant. However, it is "good practice" to send
general-header fields first, followed by request-header or response-
header fields, and ending with the entity-header fields.
Multiple message-header fields with the same field-name MAY be
present in a message if and only if the entire field-value for that
header field is defined as a comma-separated list [i.e., #(values)].
It MUST be possible to combine the multiple header fields into one
"field-name: field-value" pair, without changing the semantics of the
message, by appending each subsequent field-value to the first, each
separated by a comma. The order in which header fields with the same
field-name are received is therefore significant to the
interpretation of the combined field value, and thus a proxy MUST NOT
change the order of these field values when a message is forwarded.
The message-body (if any) of an HTTP message is used to carry the
entity-body associated with the request or response. The message-body
differs from the entity-body only when a transfer-coding has been
applied, as indicated by the Transfer-Encoding header field (section
message-body = entity-body
| <entity-body encoded as per Transfer-Encoding>
Transfer-Encoding MUST be used to indicate any transfer-codings
applied by an application to ensure safe and proper transfer of the
message. Transfer-Encoding is a property of the message, not of the
entity, and thus MAY be added or removed by any application along the
request/response chain. (However, section 3.6 places restrictions on
when certain transfer-codings may be used.)
The rules for when a message-body is allowed in a message differ for
requests and responses.
The presence of a message-body in a request is signaled by the
inclusion of a Content-Length or Transfer-Encoding header field in
the request's message-headers. A message-body MUST NOT be included in
a request if the specification of the request method (section 5.1.1)
does not allow sending an entity-body in requests. A server SHOULD
read and forward a message-body on any request; if the request method
does not include defined semantics for an entity-body, then the
message-body SHOULD be ignored when handling the request.
For response messages, whether or not a message-body is included with
a message is dependent on both the request method and the response
status code (section 6.1.1). All responses to the HEAD request method
MUST NOT include a message-body, even though the presence of entity-
header fields might lead one to believe they do. All 1xx
(informational), 204 (no content), and 304 (not modified) responses
MUST NOT include a message-body. All other responses do include a
message-body, although it MAY be of zero length.
The transfer-length of a message is the length of the message-body as
it appears in the message; that is, after any transfer-codings have
been applied. When a message-body is included with a message, the
transfer-length of that body is determined by one of the following
1.Any response message which "MUST NOT" include a message-body (such
as the 1xx, 204, and 304 responses and any response to a HEAD
request) is always terminated by the first empty line after the
header fields, regardless of the entity-header fields present in
2.If a Transfer-Encoding header field (section 14.41) is present and
has any value other than "identity", then the transfer-length is
defined by use of the "chunked" transfer-coding (section 3.6),
unless the message is terminated by closing the connection.
3.If a Content-Length header field (section 14.13) is present, its
decimal value in OCTETs represents both the entity-length and the
transfer-length. The Content-Length header field MUST NOT be sent
if these two lengths are different (i.e., if a Transfer-Encoding
header field is present). If a message is received with both a
Transfer-Encoding header field and a Content-Length header field,
the latter MUST be ignored.
4.If the message uses the media type "multipart/byteranges", and the
ransfer-length is not otherwise specified, then this self-
elimiting media type defines the transfer-length. This media type
UST NOT be used unless the sender knows that the recipient can arse
it; the presence in a request of a Range header with ultiple byte-
range specifiers from a 1.1 client implies that the lient can parse
multipart/byteranges responses.
A range header might be forwarded by a 1.0 proxy that does not
understand multipart/byteranges; in this case the server MUST
delimit the message using methods defined in items 1,3 or 5 of
5.By the server closing the connection. (Closing the connection
cannot be used to indicate the end of a request body, since that
would leave no possibility for the server to send back a response.)
For compatibility with HTTP/1.0 applications, HTTP/1.1 requests
containing a message-body MUST include a valid Content-Length header
field unless the server is known to be HTTP/1.1 compliant. If a
request contains a message-body and a Content-Length is not given,
the server SHOULD respond with 400 (bad request) if it cannot
determine the length of the message, or with 411 (length required) if
it wishes to insist on receiving a valid Content-Length.
All HTTP/1.1 applications that receive entities MUST accept the
"chunked" transfer-coding (section 3.6), thus allowing this mechanism
to be used for messages when the message length cannot be determined
Messages MUST NOT include both a Content-Length header field and a
non-identity transfer-coding. If the message does include a non-
identity transfer-coding, the Content-Length MUST be ignored.
When a Content-Length is given in a message where a message-body is
allowed, its field value MUST exactly match the number of OCTETs in
the message-body. HTTP/1.1 user agents MUST notify the user when an
invalid length is received and detected.
There are a few header fields which have general applicability for
both request and response messages, but which do not apply to the
entity being transferred. These header fields apply only to the
message being transmitted.
General-header field names can be extended reliably only in
combination with a change in the protocol version. However, new or
experimental header fields may be given the semantics of general
header fields if all parties in the communication recognize them to
be general-header fields. Unrecognized header fields are treated as
A request message from a client to a server includes, within the
first line of that message, the method to be applied to the resource,
the identifier of the resource, and the protocol version in use.
The Request-Line begins with a method token, followed by the
Request-URI and the protocol version, and ending with CRLF. The
elements are separated by SP characters. No CR or LF is allowed
except in the final CRLF sequence.
Request-Line   = Method SP Request-URI SP HTTP-Version CRLF
The Method  token indicates the method to be performed on the
resource identified by the Request-URI. The method is case-sensitive.
extension-method = token
The list of methods allowed by a resource can be specified in an
Allow header field (section 14.7). The return code of the response
always notifies the client whether a method is currently allowed on a
resource, since the set of allowed methods can change dynamically. An
origin server SHOULD return the status code 405 (Method Not Allowed)
if the method is known by the origin server but not allowed for the
requested resource, and 501 (Not Implemented) if the method is
unrecognized or not implemented by the origin server. The methods GET
and HEAD MUST be supported by all general-purpose servers. All other
methods are OPTIONAL; however, if the above methods are implemented,
they MUST be implemented with the same semantics as those specified
The Request-URI is a Uniform Resource Identifier (section 3.2) and
identifies the resource upon which to apply the request.
Request-URI    = "*" | absoluteURI | abs_path | authority
The four options for Request-URI are dependent on the nature of the
request. The asterisk "*" means that the request does not apply to a
particular resource, but to the server itself, and is only allowed
when the method used does not necessarily apply to a resource. One
The absoluteURI form is REQUIRED when the request is being made to a
proxy. The proxy is requested to forward the request or service it
from a valid cache, and return the response. Note that the proxy MAY
forward the request on to another proxy or directly to the server
specified by the absoluteURI. In order to avoid request loops, a
proxy MUST be able to recognize all of its server names, including
any aliases, local variations, and the numeric IP address. An example
GET http://www.w3.org/pub/WWW/TheProject.html HTTP/1.1
To allow for transition to absoluteURIs in all requests in future
versions of HTTP, all HTTP/1.1 servers MUST accept the absoluteURI
form in requests, even though HTTP/1.1 clients will only generate
them in requests to proxies.
The authority form is only used by the CONNECT method (section 9.9).
The most common form of Request-URI is that used to identify a
resource on an origin server or gateway. In this case the absolute
path of the URI MUST be transmitted (see section 3.2.1, abs_path) as
the Request-URI, and the network location of the URI (authority) MUST
be transmitted in a Host header field. For example, a client wishing
to retrieve the resource above directly from the origin server would
create a TCP connection to port 80 of the host "www.w3.org" and send
GET /pub/WWW/TheProject.html HTTP/1.1
followed by the remainder of the Request. Note that the absolute path
cannot be empty; if none is present in the original URI, it MUST be
given as "/" (the server root).
The Request-URI is transmitted in the format specified in section
[42], the origin server MUST decode the Request-URI in order to
properly interpret the request. Servers SHOULD respond to invalid
Request-URIs with an appropriate status code.
A transparent proxy MUST NOT rewrite the "abs_path" part of the
received Request-URI when forwarding it to the next inbound server,
except as noted above to replace a null abs_path with "/".
Note: The "no rewrite" rule prevents the proxy from changing the
meaning of the request when the origin server is improperly using
a non-reserved URI character for a reserved purpose.  Implementors
should be aware that some pre-HTTP/1.1 proxies have been known to
rewrite the Request-URI.
The exact resource identified by an Internet request is determined by
examining both the Request-URI and the Host header field.
An origin server that does not allow resources to differ by the
requested host MAY ignore the Host header field value when
determining the resource identified by an HTTP/1.1 request. (But see
section 19.6.1.1 for other requirements on Host support in HTTP/1.1.)
An origin server that does differentiate resources based on the host
requested (sometimes referred to as virtual hosts or vanity host
names) MUST use the following rules for determining the requested
resource on an HTTP/1.1 request:
Request-URI. Any Host header field value in the request MUST be
a Host header field, the host is determined by the Host header
the server, the response MUST be a 400 (Bad Request) error message.
Recipients of an HTTP/1.0 request that lacks a Host header field MAY
attempt to use heuristics (e.g., examination of the URI path for
something unique to a particular host) in order to determine what
exact resource is being requested.
The request-header fields allow the client to pass additional
information about the request, and about the client itself, to the
server. These fields act as request modifiers, with semantics
equivalent to the parameters on a programming language method
Request-header field names can be extended reliably only in
experimental header fields MAY be given the semantics of request-
be request-header fields. Unrecognized header fields are treated as
After receiving and interpreting a request message, a server responds
with an HTTP response message.
The first line of a Response message is the Status-Line, consisting
of the protocol version followed by a numeric status code and its
associated textual phrase, with each element separated by SP
characters. No CR or LF is allowed except in the final CRLF sequence.
Status-Line = HTTP-Version SP Status-Code SP Reason-Phrase CRLF
The Status-Code element is a 3-digit integer result code of the
attempt to understand and satisfy the request. These codes are fully
defined in section 10. The Reason-Phrase is intended to give a short
textual description of the Status-Code. The Status-Code is intended
for use by automata and the Reason-Phrase is intended for the human
user. The client is not required to examine or display the Reason-
The first digit of the Status-Code defines the class of response. The
last two digits do not have any categorization role. There are 5
values for the first digit:
- 1xx: Informational - Request received, continuing process
- 2xx: Success - The action was successfully received,
understood, and accepted
- 3xx: Redirection - Further action must be taken in order to
- 4xx: Client Error - The request contains bad syntax or cannot
- 5xx: Server Error - The server failed to fulfill an apparently
The individual values of the numeric status codes defined for
HTTP/1.1, and an example set of corresponding Reason-Phrase's, are
presented below. The reason phrases listed here are only
recommendations -- they MAY be replaced by local equivalents without
affecting the protocol.
Reason-Phrase  = *<TEXT, excluding CR, LF>
HTTP status codes are extensible. HTTP applications are not required
to understand the meaning of all registered status codes, though such
understanding is obviously desirable. However, applications MUST
understand the class of any status code, as indicated by the first
digit, and treat any unrecognized response as being equivalent to the
x00 status code of that class, with the exception that an
unrecognized response MUST NOT be cached. For example, if an
unrecognized status code of 431 is received by the client, it can
safely assume that there was something wrong with its request and
treat the response as if it had received a 400 status code. In such
cases, user agents SHOULD present to the user the entity returned
with the response, since that entity is likely to include human-
readable information which will explain the unusual status.
The response-header fields allow the server to pass additional
information about the response which cannot be placed in the Status-
Line. These header fields give information about the server and about
further access to the resource identified by the Request-URI.
Response-header field names can be extended reliably only in
experimental header fields MAY be given the semantics of response-
be response-header fields. Unrecognized header fields are treated as
Request and Response messages MAY transfer an entity if not otherwise
restricted by the request method or response status code. An entity
consists of entity-header fields and an entity-body, although some
responses will only include the entity-headers.
In this section, both sender and recipient refer to either the client
or the server, depending on who sends and who receives the entity.
Entity-header fields define metainformation about the entity-body or,
if no body is present, about the resource identified by the request.
Some of this metainformation is OPTIONAL; some might be REQUIRED by
portions of this specification.
extension-header = message-header
The extension-header mechanism allows additional entity-header fields
to be defined without changing the protocol, but these fields cannot
be assumed to be recognizable by the recipient. Unrecognized header
fields SHOULD be ignored by the recipient and MUST be forwarded by
The entity-body (if any) sent with an HTTP request or response is in
a format and encoding defined by the entity-header fields.
An entity-body is only present in a message when a message-body is
present, as described in section 4.3. The entity-body is obtained
from the message-body by decoding any Transfer-Encoding that might
have been applied to ensure safe and proper transfer of the message.
When an entity-body is included with a message, the data type of that
body is determined via the header fields Content-Type and Content-
Encoding. These define a two-layer, ordered encoding model:
entity-body := Content-Encoding( Content-Type( data ) )
Content-Type specifies the media type of the underlying data.
Content-Encoding may be used to indicate any additional content
codings applied to the data, usually for the purpose of data
compression, that are a property of the requested resource. There is
Any HTTP/1.1 message containing an entity-body SHOULD include a
Content-Type header field defining the media type of that body. If
and only if the media type is not given by a Content-Type field, the
recipient MAY attempt to guess the media type via inspection of its
content and/or the name extension(s) of the URI used to identify the
resource. If the media type remains unknown, the recipient SHOULD
treat it as type "application/octet-stream".
The entity-length of a message is the length of the message-body
before any transfer-codings have been applied. Section 4.4 defines
how the transfer-length of a message-body is determined.
Prior to persistent connections, a separate TCP connection was
established to fetch each URL, increasing the load on HTTP servers
and causing congestion on the Internet. The use of inline images and
other associated data often require a client to make multiple
requests of the same server in a short amount of time. Analysis of
these performance problems and results from a prototype
implementation are available [26] [30]. Implementation experience and
measurements of actual HTTP/1.1 (RFC 2068) implementations show good
results [39]. Alternatives have also been explored, for example,
Persistent HTTP connections have a number of advantages:
- By opening and closing fewer TCP connections, CPU time is saved
in routers and hosts (clients, servers, proxies, gateways,
tunnels, or caches), and memory used for TCP protocol control
blocks can be saved in hosts.
- HTTP requests and responses can be pipelined on a connection.
Pipelining allows a client to make multiple requests without
waiting for each response, allowing a single TCP connection to
be used much more efficiently, with much lower elapsed time.
- Network congestion is reduced by reducing the number of packets
caused by TCP opens, and by allowing TCP sufficient time to
determine the congestion state of the network.
- Latency on subsequent requests is reduced since there is no time
spent in TCP's connection opening handshake.
- HTTP can evolve more gracefully, since errors can be reported
without the penalty of closing the TCP connection. Clients using
future versions of HTTP might optimistically try a new feature,
but if communicating with an older server, retry with old
semantics after an error is reported.
HTTP implementations SHOULD implement persistent connections.
A significant difference between HTTP/1.1 and earlier versions of
HTTP is that persistent connections are the default behavior of any
HTTP connection. That is, unless otherwise indicated, the client
SHOULD assume that the server will maintain a persistent connection,
even after error responses from the server.
Persistent connections provide a mechanism by which a client and a
server can signal the close of a TCP connection. This signaling takes
place using the Connection header field (section 14.10). Once a close
has been signaled, the client MUST NOT send any more requests on that
An HTTP/1.1 server MAY assume that a HTTP/1.1 client intends to
maintain a persistent connection unless a Connection header including
the connection-token "close" was sent in the request. If the server
chooses to close the connection immediately after sending the
response, it SHOULD send a Connection header including the
connection-token close.
An HTTP/1.1 client MAY expect a connection to remain open, but would
decide to keep it open based on whether the response from a server
contains a Connection header with the connection-token close. In case
the client does not want to maintain a connection for more than that
request, it SHOULD send a Connection header including the
If either the client or the server sends the close token in the
Connection header, that request becomes the last one for the
Clients and servers SHOULD NOT assume that a persistent connection is
maintained for HTTP versions less than 1.1 unless it is explicitly
signaled. See section 19.6.2 for more information on backward
compatibility with HTTP/1.0 clients.
In order to remain persistent, all messages on the connection MUST
have a self-defined message length (i.e., one not defined by closure
of the connection), as described in section 4.4.
A client that supports persistent connections MAY "pipeline" its
requests (i.e., send multiple requests without waiting for each
response). A server MUST send its responses to those requests in the
same order that the requests were received.
Clients which assume persistent connections and pipeline immediately
after connection establishment SHOULD be prepared to retry their
connection if the first pipelined attempt fails. If a client does
such a retry, it MUST NOT pipeline before it knows the connection is
persistent. Clients MUST also be prepared to resend their requests if
the server closes the connection before sending all of the
corresponding responses.
Clients SHOULD NOT pipeline requests using non-idempotent methods or
non-idempotent sequences of methods (see section 9.1.2). Otherwise, a
premature termination of the transport connection could lead to
indeterminate results. A client wishing to send a non-idempotent
request SHOULD wait to send that request until it has received the
response status for the previous request.
It is especially important that proxies correctly implement the
properties of the Connection header field as specified in section
The proxy server MUST signal persistent connections separately with
its clients and the origin servers (or other proxy servers) that it
connects to. Each persistent connection applies to only one transport
A proxy server MUST NOT establish a HTTP/1.1 persistent connection
with an HTTP/1.0 client (but see RFC 2068 [33] for information and
discussion of the problems with the Keep-Alive header implemented by
Servers will usually have some time-out value beyond which they will
no longer maintain an inactive connection. Proxy servers might make
this a higher value since it is likely that the client will be making
more connections through the same server. The use of persistent
connections places no requirements on the length (or existence) of
this time-out for either the client or the server.
When a client or server wishes to time-out it SHOULD issue a graceful
close on the transport connection. Clients and servers SHOULD both
constantly watch for the other side of the transport close, and
respond to it as appropriate. If a client or server does not detect
the other side's close promptly it could cause unnecessary resource
A client, server, or proxy MAY close the transport connection at any
time. For example, a client might have started to send a new request
at the same time that the server has decided to close the "idle"
connection. From the server's point of view, the connection is being
closed while it was idle, but from the client's point of view, a
This means that clients, servers, and proxies MUST be able to recover
from asynchronous close events. Client software SHOULD reopen the
transport connection and retransmit the aborted sequence of requests
without user interaction so long as the request sequence is
idempotent (see section 9.1.2). Non-idempotent methods or sequences
MUST NOT be automatically retried, although user agents MAY offer a
human operator the choice of retrying the request(s). Confirmation by
user-agent software with semantic understanding of the application
MAY substitute for user confirmation. The automatic retry SHOULD NOT
be repeated if the second sequence of requests fails.
Servers SHOULD always respond to at least one request per connection,
if at all possible. Servers SHOULD NOT close a connection in the
middle of transmitting a response, unless a network or client failure
Clients that use persistent connections SHOULD limit the number of
simultaneous connections that they maintain to a given server. A
single-user client SHOULD NOT maintain more than 2 connections with
any server or proxy. A proxy SHOULD use up to 2*N connections to
another server or proxy, where N is the number of simultaneously
active users. These guidelines are intended to improve HTTP response
times and avoid congestion.
HTTP/1.1 servers SHOULD maintain persistent connections and use TCP's
flow control mechanisms to resolve temporary overloads, rather than
terminating connections with the expectation that clients will retry.
The latter technique can exacerbate network congestion.
An HTTP/1.1 (or later) client sending a message-body SHOULD monitor
the network connection for an error status while it is transmitting
the request. If the client sees an error status, it SHOULD
immediately cease transmitting the body. If the body is being sent
using a "chunked" encoding (section 3.6), a zero length chunk and
empty trailer MAY be used to prematurely mark the end of the message.
If the body was preceded by a Content-Length header, the client MUST
The purpose of the 100 (Continue) status (see section 10.1.1) is to
allow a client that is sending a request message with a request body
to determine if the origin server is willing to accept the request
(based on the request headers) before the client sends the request
body. In some cases, it might either be inappropriate or highly
inefficient for the client to send the body if the server will reject
the message without looking at the body.
Requirements for HTTP/1.1 clients:
- If a client will wait for a 100 (Continue) response before
sending the request body, it MUST send an Expect request-header
field (section 14.20) with the "100-continue" expectation.
- A client MUST NOT send an Expect request-header field (section
14.20) with the "100-continue" expectation if it does not intend
Because of the presence of older implementations, the protocol allows
ambiguous situations in which a client may send "Expect: 100-
continue" without receiving either a 417 (Expectation Failed) status
or a 100 (Continue) status. Therefore, when a client sends this
header field to an origin server (possibly via a proxy) from which it
has never seen a 100 (Continue) status, the client SHOULD NOT wait
for an indefinite period before sending the request body.
Requirements for HTTP/1.1 origin servers:
- Upon receiving a request which includes an Expect request-header
field with the "100-continue" expectation, an origin server MUST
either respond with 100 (Continue) status and continue to read
from the input stream, or respond with a final status code. The
origin server MUST NOT wait for the request body before sending
the 100 (Continue) response. If it responds with a final status
code, it MAY close the transport connection or it MAY continue
to read and discard the rest of the request.  It MUST NOT
perform the requested method if it returns a final status code.
- An origin server SHOULD NOT send a 100 (Continue) response if
the request message does not include an Expect request-header
field with the "100-continue" expectation, and MUST NOT send a
(or earlier) client. There is an exception to this rule: for
compatibility with RFC 2068, a server MAY send a 100 (Continue)
status in response to an HTTP/1.1 PUT or POST request that does
not include an Expect request-header field with the "100-
continue" expectation. This exception, the purpose of which is
to minimize any client processing delays associated with an
undeclared wait for 100 (Continue) status, applies only to
HTTP/1.1 requests, and not to requests with any other HTTP-
- An origin server MAY omit a 100 (Continue) response if it has
already received some or all of the request body for the
corresponding request.
- An origin server that sends a 100 (Continue) response MUST
ultimately send a final status code, once the request body is
received and processed, unless it terminates the transport
connection prematurely.
- If an origin server receives a request that does not include an
Expect request-header field with the "100-continue" expectation,
the request includes a request body, and the server responds
with a final status code before reading the entire request body
from the transport connection, then the server SHOULD NOT close
the transport connection until it has read the entire request,
or until the client closes the connection. Otherwise, the client
might not reliably receive the response message. However, this
requirement is not be construed as preventing a server from
defending itself against denial-of-service attacks, or from
badly broken client implementations.
Requirements for HTTP/1.1 proxies:
- If a proxy receives a request that includes an Expect request-
header field with the "100-continue" expectation, and the proxy
either knows that the next-hop server complies with HTTP/1.1 or
higher, or does not know the HTTP version of the next-hop
server, it MUST forward the request, including the Expect header
- If the proxy knows that the version of the next-hop server is
HTTP/1.0 or lower, it MUST NOT forward the request, and it MUST
respond with a 417 (Expectation Failed) status.
- Proxies SHOULD maintain a cache recording the HTTP version
numbers received from recently-referenced next-hop servers.
- A proxy MUST NOT forward a 100 (Continue) response if the
request message was received from an HTTP/1.0 (or earlier)
client and did not include an Expect request-header field with
the "100-continue" expectation. This requirement overrides the
general rule for forwarding of 1xx responses (see section 10.1).
If an HTTP/1.1 client sends a request which includes a request body,
but which does not include an Expect request-header field with the
"100-continue" expectation, and if the client is not directly
connected to an HTTP/1.1 origin server, and if the client sees the
connection close before receiving any status from the server, the
client SHOULD retry the request.  If the client does retry this
request, it MAY use the following "binary exponential backoff"
algorithm to be assured of obtaining a reliable response:
server (e.g., based on the time it took to establish the
connection), or to a constant value of 5 seconds if the round-
trip time is not available.
retries of this request.
seconds (whichever comes first)
repeat from step 1 until the request is accepted, an error
response is received, or the user becomes impatient and
terminates the retry process.
If at any point an error status is received, the client
- SHOULD NOT continue and
- SHOULD close the connection if it has not completed sending the
The set of common methods for HTTP/1.1 is defined below. Although
this set can be expanded, additional methods cannot be assumed to
share the same semantics for separately extended clients and servers.
The Host request-header field (section 14.23) MUST accompany all
Implementors should be aware that the software represents the user in
their interactions over the Internet, and should be careful to allow
the user to be aware of any actions they might take which may have an
unexpected significance to themselves or others.
In particular, the convention has been established that the GET and
HEAD methods SHOULD NOT have the significance of taking an action
other than retrieval. These methods ought to be considered "safe".
This allows user agents to represent other methods, such as POST, PUT
and DELETE, in a special way, so that the user is made aware of the
fact that a possibly unsafe action is being requested.
Naturally, it is not possible to ensure that the server does not
generate side-effects as a result of performing a GET request; in
fact, some dynamic resources consider that a feature. The important
distinction here is that the user did not request the side-effects,
so therefore cannot be held accountable for them.
Methods can also have the property of "idempotence" in that (aside
from error or expiration issues) the side-effects of N > 0 identical
requests is the same as for a single request. The methods GET, HEAD,
PUT and DELETE share this property. Also, the methods OPTIONS and
TRACE SHOULD NOT have side effects, and so are inherently idempotent.
However, it is possible that a sequence of several requests is non-
idempotent, even if all of the methods executed in that sequence are
idempotent. (A sequence is idempotent if a single execution of the
entire sequence always yields a result that is not changed by a
reexecution of all, or part, of that sequence.) For example, a
sequence is non-idempotent if its result depends on a value that is
later modified in the same sequence.
A sequence that never has side effects is idempotent, by definition
(provided that no concurrent operations are being executed on the
The OPTIONS method represents a request for information about the
communication options available on the request/response chain
identified by the Request-URI. This method allows the client to
determine the options and/or requirements associated with a resource,
or the capabilities of a server, without implying a resource action
or initiating a resource retrieval.
Responses to this method are not cacheable.
If the OPTIONS request includes an entity-body (as indicated by the
presence of Content-Length or Transfer-Encoding), then the media type
MUST be indicated by a Content-Type field. Although this
specification does not define any use for such a body, future
extensions to HTTP might use the OPTIONS body to make more detailed
queries on the server. A server that does not support such an
extension MAY discard the request body.
If the Request-URI is an asterisk ("*"), the OPTIONS request is
intended to apply to the server in general rather than to a specific
resource. Since a server's communication options typically depend on
the resource, the "*" request is only useful as a "ping" or "no-op"
type of method; it does nothing beyond allowing the client to test
the capabilities of the server. For example, this can be used to test
a proxy for HTTP/1.1 compliance (or lack thereof).
If the Request-URI is not an asterisk, the OPTIONS request applies
only to the options that are available when communicating with that
A 200 response SHOULD include any header fields that indicate
optional features implemented by the server and applicable to that
resource (e.g., Allow), possibly including extensions not defined by
this specification. The response body, if any, SHOULD also include
information about the communication options. The format for such a
body is not defined by this specification, but might be defined by
future extensions to HTTP. Content negotiation MAY be used to select
the appropriate response format. If no response body is included, the
response MUST include a Content-Length field with a field-value of
The Max-Forwards request-header field MAY be used to target a
specific proxy in the request chain. When a proxy receives an OPTIONS
request on an absoluteURI for which request forwarding is permitted,
the proxy MUST check for a Max-Forwards field. If the Max-Forwards
field-value is zero ("0"), the proxy MUST NOT forward the message;
instead, the proxy SHOULD respond with its own communication options.
If the Max-Forwards field-value is an integer greater than zero, the
proxy MUST decrement the field-value when it forwards the request. If
no Max-Forwards field is present in the request, then the forwarded
request MUST NOT include a Max-Forwards field.
The GET method means retrieve whatever information (in the form of an
entity) is identified by the Request-URI. If the Request-URI refers
to a data-producing process, it is the produced data which shall be
returned as the entity in the response and not the source text of the
process, unless that text happens to be the output of the process.
The semantics of the GET method change to a "conditional GET" if the
request message includes an If-Modified-Since, If-Unmodified-Since,
If-Match, If-None-Match, or If-Range header field. A conditional GET
method requests that the entity be transferred only under the
circumstances described by the conditional header field(s). The
conditional GET method is intended to reduce unnecessary network
usage by allowing cached entities to be refreshed without requiring
multiple requests or transferring data already held by the client.
The semantics of the GET method change to a "partial GET" if the
request message includes a Range header field. A partial GET requests
that only part of the entity be transferred, as described in section
network usage by allowing partially-retrieved entities to be
completed without transferring data already held by the client.
The response to a GET request is cacheable if and only if it meets
the requirements for HTTP caching described in section 13.
See section 15.1.3 for security considerations when used for forms.
The HEAD method is identical to GET except that the server MUST NOT
return a message-body in the response. The metainformation contained
in the HTTP headers in response to a HEAD request SHOULD be identical
to the information sent in response to a GET request. This method can
be used for obtaining metainformation about the entity implied by the
request without transferring the entity-body itself. This method is
often used for testing hypertext links for validity, accessibility,
and recent modification.
The response to a HEAD request MAY be cacheable in the sense that the
information contained in the response MAY be used to update a
previously cached entity from that resource. If the new field values
indicate that the cached entity differs from the current entity (as
would be indicated by a change in Content-Length, Content-MD5, ETag
or Last-Modified), then the cache MUST treat the cache entry as
The POST method is used to request that the origin server accept the
entity enclosed in the request as a new subordinate of the resource
identified by the Request-URI in the Request-Line. POST is designed
to allow a uniform method to cover the following functions:
- Annotation of existing resources;
- Posting a message to a bulletin board, newsgroup, mailing list,
or similar group of articles;
- Providing a block of data, such as the result of submitting a
form, to a data-handling process;
- Extending a database through an append operation.
The actual function performed by the POST method is determined by the
server and is usually dependent on the Request-URI. The posted entity
is subordinate to that URI in the same way that a file is subordinate
to a directory containing it, a news article is subordinate to a
newsgroup to which it is posted, or a record is subordinate to a
The action performed by the POST method might not result in a
resource that can be identified by a URI. In this case, either 200
(OK) or 204 (No Content) is the appropriate response status,
depending on whether or not the response includes an entity that
If a resource has been created on the origin server, the response
SHOULD be 201 (Created) and contain an entity which describes the
status of the request and refers to the new resource, and a Location
Responses to this method are not cacheable, unless the response
includes appropriate Cache-Control or Expires header fields. However,
the 303 (See Other) response can be used to direct the user agent to
retrieve a cacheable resource.
POST requests MUST obey the message transmission requirements set out
See section 15.1.3 for security considerations.
The PUT method requests that the enclosed entity be stored under the
supplied Request-URI. If the Request-URI refers to an already
existing resource, the enclosed entity SHOULD be considered as a
modified version of the one residing on the origin server. If the
Request-URI does not point to an existing resource, and that URI is
capable of being defined as a new resource by the requesting user
agent, the origin server can create the resource with that URI. If a
new resource is created, the origin server MUST inform the user agent
via the 201 (Created) response. If an existing resource is modified,
either the 200 (OK) or 204 (No Content) response codes SHOULD be sent
to indicate successful completion of the request. If the resource
could not be created or modified with the Request-URI, an appropriate
error response SHOULD be given that reflects the nature of the
problem. The recipient of the entity MUST NOT ignore any Content-*
(e.g. Content-Range) headers that it does not understand or implement
and MUST return a 501 (Not Implemented) response in such cases.
If the request passes through a cache and the Request-URI identifies
one or more currently cached entities, those entries SHOULD be
treated as stale. Responses to this method are not cacheable.
The fundamental difference between the POST and PUT requests is
reflected in the different meaning of the Request-URI. The URI in a
POST request identifies the resource that will handle the enclosed
entity. That resource might be a data-accepting process, a gateway to
some other protocol, or a separate entity that accepts annotations.
In contrast, the URI in a PUT request identifies the entity enclosed
with the request -- the user agent knows what URI is intended and the
server MUST NOT attempt to apply the request to some other resource.
If the server desires that the request be applied to a different URI,
it MUST send a 301 (Moved Permanently) response; the user agent MAY
then make its own decision regarding whether or not to redirect the
A single resource MAY be identified by many different URIs. For
example, an article might have a URI for identifying "the current
version" which is separate from the URI identifying each particular
version. In this case, a PUT request on a general URI might result in
several other URIs being defined by the origin server.
HTTP/1.1 does not define how a PUT method affects the state of an
PUT requests MUST obey the message transmission requirements set out
Unless otherwise specified for a particular entity-header, the
entity-headers in the PUT request SHOULD be applied to the resource
created or modified by the PUT.
The DELETE method requests that the origin server delete the resource
identified by the Request-URI. This method MAY be overridden by human
intervention (or other means) on the origin server. The client cannot
be guaranteed that the operation has been carried out, even if the
status code returned from the origin server indicates that the action
has been completed successfully. However, the server SHOULD NOT
indicate success unless, at the time the response is given, it
intends to delete the resource or move it to an inaccessible
A successful response SHOULD be 200 (OK) if the response includes an
entity describing the status, 202 (Accepted) if the action has not
yet been enacted, or 204 (No Content) if the action has been enacted
but the response does not include an entity.
The TRACE method is used to invoke a remote, application-layer loop-
back of the request message. The final recipient of the request
SHOULD reflect the message received back to the client as the
entity-body of a 200 (OK) response. The final recipient is either the
origin server or the first proxy or gateway to receive a Max-Forwards
value of zero (0) in the request (see section 14.31). A TRACE request
MUST NOT include an entity.
TRACE allows the client to see what is being received at the other
end of the request chain and use that data for testing or diagnostic
information. The value of the Via header field (section 14.45) is of
particular interest, since it acts as a trace of the request chain.
Use of the Max-Forwards header field allows the client to limit the
length of the request chain, which is useful for testing a chain of
proxies forwarding messages in an infinite loop.
If the request is valid, the response SHOULD contain the entire
request message in the entity-body, with a Content-Type of
"message/http". Responses to this method MUST NOT be cached.
This specification reserves the method name CONNECT for use with a
proxy that can dynamically switch to being a tunnel (e.g. SSL
Each Status-Code is described below, including a description of which
method(s) it can follow and any metainformation required in the
This class of status code indicates a provisional response,
consisting only of the Status-Line and optional headers, and is
terminated by an empty line. There are no required headers for this
class of status code. Since HTTP/1.0 did not define any 1xx status
codes, servers MUST NOT send a 1xx response to an HTTP/1.0 client
except under experimental conditions.
A client MUST be prepared to accept one or more 1xx status responses
prior to a regular response, even if the client does not expect a 100
(Continue) status message. Unexpected 1xx status responses MAY be
Proxies MUST forward 1xx responses, unless the connection between the
proxy and its client has been closed, or unless the proxy itself
requested the generation of the 1xx response. (For example, if a
proxy adds a "Expect: 100-continue" field when it forwards a request,
then it need not forward the corresponding 100 (Continue)
The client SHOULD continue with its request. This interim response is
used to inform the client that the initial part of the request has
been received and has not yet been rejected by the server. The client
SHOULD continue by sending the remainder of the request or, if the
request has already been completed, ignore this response. The server
MUST send a final response after the request has been completed. See
section 8.2.3 for detailed discussion of the use and handling of this
The server understands and is willing to comply with the client's
request, via the Upgrade message header field (section 14.42), for a
change in the application protocol being used on this connection. The
server will switch protocols to those defined by the response's
Upgrade header field immediately after the empty line which
terminates the 101 response.
The protocol SHOULD be switched only when it is advantageous to do
so. For example, switching to a newer version of HTTP is advantageous
over older versions, and switching to a real-time, synchronous
protocol might be advantageous when delivering resources that use
This class of status code indicates that the client's request was
successfully received, understood, and accepted.
The request has succeeded. The information returned with the response
is dependent on the method used in the request, for example:
GET    an entity corresponding to the requested resource is sent in
HEAD   the entity-header fields corresponding to the requested
resource are sent in the response without any message-body;
POST   an entity describing or containing the result of the action;
TRACE  an entity containing the request message as received by the
The request has been fulfilled and resulted in a new resource being
created. The newly created resource can be referenced by the URI(s)
returned in the entity of the response, with the most specific URI
for the resource given by a Location header field. The response
SHOULD include an entity containing a list of resource
characteristics and location(s) from which the user or user agent can
choose the one most appropriate. The entity format is specified by
the media type given in the Content-Type header field. The origin
server MUST create the resource before returning the 201 status code.
If the action cannot be carried out immediately, the server SHOULD
respond with 202 (Accepted) response instead.
A 201 response MAY contain an ETag response header field indicating
the current value of the entity tag for the requested variant just
The request has been accepted for processing, but the processing has
not been completed.  The request might or might not eventually be
acted upon, as it might be disallowed when processing actually takes
place. There is no facility for re-sending a status code from an
asynchronous operation such as this.
The 202 response is intentionally non-committal. Its purpose is to
allow a server to accept a request for some other process (perhaps a
batch-oriented process that is only run once per day) without
requiring that the user agent's connection to the server persist
until the process is completed. The entity returned with this
response SHOULD include an indication of the request's current status
and either a pointer to a status monitor or some estimate of when the
user can expect the request to be fulfilled.
The returned metainformation in the entity-header is not the
definitive set as available from the origin server, but is gathered
from a local or a third-party copy. The set presented MAY be a subset
or superset of the original version. For example, including local
annotation information about the resource might result in a superset
of the metainformation known by the origin server. Use of this
response code is not required and is only appropriate when the
response would otherwise be 200 (OK).
The server has fulfilled the request but does not need to return an
entity-body, and might want to return updated metainformation. The
response MAY include new or updated metainformation in the form of
entity-headers, which if present SHOULD be associated with the
If the client is a user agent, it SHOULD NOT change its document view
from that which caused the request to be sent. This response is
primarily intended to allow input for actions to take place without
causing a change to the user agent's active document view, although
any new or updated metainformation SHOULD be applied to the document
currently in the user agent's active view.
The 204 response MUST NOT include a message-body, and thus is always
terminated by the first empty line after the header fields.
The server has fulfilled the request and the user agent SHOULD reset
the document view which caused the request to be sent. This response
is primarily intended to allow input for actions to take place via
user input, followed by a clearing of the form in which the input is
given so that the user can easily initiate another input action. The
response MUST NOT include an entity.
The server has fulfilled the partial GET request for the resource.
The request MUST have included a Range header field (section 14.35)
indicating the desired range, and MAY have included an If-Range
header field (section 14.27) to make the request conditional.
The response MUST include the following header fields:
- Either a Content-Range header field (section 14.16) indicating
the range included with this response, or a multipart/byteranges
Content-Type including Content-Range fields for each part. If a
Content-Length header field is present in the response, its
value MUST match the actual number of OCTETs transmitted in the
- ETag and/or Content-Location, if the header would have been sent
in a 200 response to the same request
- Expires, Cache-Control, and/or Vary, if the field-value might
differ from that sent in any previous response for the same
If the 206 response is the result of an If-Range request that used a
strong cache validator (see section 13.3.3), the response SHOULD NOT
include other entity-headers. If the response is the result of an
If-Range request that used a weak validator, the response MUST NOT
include other entity-headers; this prevents inconsistencies between
cached entity-bodies and updated headers. Otherwise, the response
MUST include all of the entity-headers that would have been returned
with a 200 (OK) response to the same request.
A cache MUST NOT combine a 206 response with other previously cached
content if the ETag or Last-Modified headers do not match exactly,
A cache that does not support the Range and Content-Range headers
MUST NOT cache 206 (Partial) responses.
This class of status code indicates that further action needs to be
taken by the user agent in order to fulfill the request.  The action
required MAY be carried out by the user agent without interaction
with the user if and only if the method used in the second request is
GET or HEAD. A client SHOULD detect infinite redirection loops, since
such loops generate network traffic for each redirection.
Note: previous versions of this specification recommended a
maximum of five redirections. Content developers should be aware
that there might be clients that implement such a fixed
The requested resource corresponds to any one of a set of
representations, each with its own specific location, and agent-
driven negotiation information (section 12) is being provided so that
the user (or user agent) can select a preferred representation and
redirect its request to that location.
Unless it was a HEAD request, the response SHOULD include an entity
containing a list of resource characteristics and location(s) from
which the user or user agent can choose the one most appropriate. The
entity format is specified by the media type given in the Content-
Type header field. Depending upon the format and the capabilities of
the user agent, selection of the most appropriate choice MAY be
performed automatically. However, this specification does not define
any standard for such automatic selection.
If the server has a preferred choice of representation, it SHOULD
include the specific URI for that representation in the Location
field; user agents MAY use the Location field value for automatic
redirection. This response is cacheable unless indicated otherwise.
The requested resource has been assigned a new permanent URI and any
future references to this resource SHOULD use one of the returned
URIs.  Clients with link editing capabilities ought to automatically
re-link references to the Request-URI to one or more of the new
references returned by the server, where possible. This response is
cacheable unless indicated otherwise.
The new permanent URI SHOULD be given by the Location field in the
response. Unless the request method was HEAD, the entity of the
response SHOULD contain a short hypertext note with a hyperlink to
If the 301 status code is received in response to a request other
than GET or HEAD, the user agent MUST NOT automatically redirect the
request unless it can be confirmed by the user, since this might
change the conditions under which the request was issued.
Note: When automatically redirecting a POST request after
receiving a 301 status code, some existing HTTP/1.0 user agents
will erroneously change it into a GET request.
The requested resource resides temporarily under a different URI.
Since the redirection might be altered on occasion, the client SHOULD
continue to use the Request-URI for future requests.  This response
is only cacheable if indicated by a Cache-Control or Expires header
The temporary URI SHOULD be given by the Location field in the
If the 302 status code is received in response to a request other
Note: RFC 1945 and RFC 2068 specify that the client is not allowed
to change the method on the redirected request.  However, most
existing user agent implementations treat 302 as if it were a 303
response, performing a GET on the Location field-value regardless
of the original request method. The status codes 303 and 307 have
been added for servers that wish to make unambiguously clear which
kind of reaction is expected of the client.
The response to the request can be found under a different URI and
SHOULD be retrieved using a GET method on that resource. This method
exists primarily to allow the output of a POST-activated script to
redirect the user agent to a selected resource. The new URI is not a
substitute reference for the originally requested resource. The 303
response MUST NOT be cached, but the response to the second
(redirected) request might be cacheable.
The different URI SHOULD be given by the Location field in the
Note: Many pre-HTTP/1.1 user agents do not understand the 303
status. When interoperability with such clients is a concern, the
to a 302 response as described here for 303.
If the client has performed a conditional GET request and access is
allowed, but the document has not been modified, the server SHOULD
respond with this status code. The 304 response MUST NOT contain a
message-body, and thus is always terminated by the first empty line
after the header fields.
- Date, unless its omission is required by section 14.18.1
If a clockless origin server obeys these rules, and proxies and
clients add their own Date to any response received without one (as
already specified by [RFC 2068], section 14.19), caches will operate
If the conditional GET used a strong cache validator (see section
13.3.3), the response SHOULD NOT include other entity-headers.
Otherwise (i.e., the conditional GET used a weak validator), the
response MUST NOT include other entity-headers; this prevents
inconsistencies between cached entity-bodies and updated headers.
If a 304 response indicates an entity not currently cached, then the
cache MUST disregard the response and repeat the request without the
If a cache uses a received 304 response to update a cache entry, the
cache MUST update the entry to reflect any new field values given in
The requested resource MUST be accessed through the proxy given by
the Location field. The Location field gives the URI of the proxy.
The recipient is expected to repeat this single request via the
proxy. 305 responses MUST only be generated by origin servers.
Note: RFC 2068 was not clear that 305 was intended to redirect a
single request, and to be generated by origin servers only.  Not
observing these limitations has significant security consequences.
The 306 status code was used in a previous version of the
specification, is no longer used, and the code is reserved.
Since the redirection MAY be altered on occasion, the client SHOULD
the new URI(s) , since many pre-HTTP/1.1 user agents do not
understand the 307 status. Therefore, the note SHOULD contain the
information necessary for a user to repeat the original request on
If the 307 status code is received in response to a request other
The 4xx class of status code is intended for cases in which the
client seems to have erred. Except when responding to a HEAD request,
the server SHOULD include an entity containing an explanation of the
error situation, and whether it is a temporary or permanent
condition. These status codes are applicable to any request method.
User agents SHOULD display any included entity to the user.
If the client is sending data, a server implementation using TCP
SHOULD be careful to ensure that the client acknowledges receipt of
the packet(s) containing the response, before the server closes the
input connection. If the client continues sending data to the server
after the close, the server's TCP stack will send a reset packet to
the client, which may erase the client's unacknowledged input buffers
before they can be read and interpreted by the HTTP application.
The request could not be understood by the server due to malformed
syntax. The client SHOULD NOT repeat the request without
The request requires user authentication. The response MUST include a
WWW-Authenticate header field (section 14.47) containing a challenge
applicable to the requested resource. The client MAY repeat the
request with a suitable Authorization header field (section 14.8). If
the request already included Authorization credentials, then the 401
response indicates that authorization has been refused for those
credentials. If the 401 response contains the same challenge as the
prior response, and the user agent has already attempted
authentication at least once, then the user SHOULD be presented the
entity that was given in the response, since that entity might
include relevant diagnostic information. HTTP access authentication
is explained in "HTTP Authentication: Basic and Digest Access
This code is reserved for future use.
The server understood the request, but is refusing to fulfill it.
Authorization will not help and the request SHOULD NOT be repeated.
If the request method was not HEAD and the server wishes to make
public why the request has not been fulfilled, it SHOULD describe the
reason for the refusal in the entity.  If the server does not wish to
make this information available to the client, the status code 404
(Not Found) can be used instead.
The server has not found anything matching the Request-URI. No
indication is given of whether the condition is temporary or
permanent. The 410 (Gone) status code SHOULD be used if the server
knows, through some internally configurable mechanism, that an old
resource is permanently unavailable and has no forwarding address.
This status code is commonly used when the server does not wish to
reveal exactly why the request has been refused, or when no other
response is applicable.
The method specified in the Request-Line is not allowed for the
resource identified by the Request-URI. The response MUST include an
Allow header containing a list of valid methods for the requested
The resource identified by the request is only capable of generating
response entities which have content characteristics not acceptable
according to the accept headers sent in the request.
containing a list of available entity characteristics and location(s)
from which the user or user agent can choose the one most
appropriate. The entity format is specified by the media type given
in the Content-Type header field. Depending upon the format and the
capabilities of the user agent, selection of the most appropriate
choice MAY be performed automatically. However, this specification
does not define any standard for such automatic selection.
Note: HTTP/1.1 servers are allowed to return responses which are
not acceptable according to the accept headers sent in the
request. In some cases, this may even be preferable to sending a
an incoming response to determine if it is acceptable.
If the response could be unacceptable, a user agent SHOULD
temporarily stop receipt of more data and query the user for a
decision on further actions.
This code is similar to 401 (Unauthorized), but indicates that the
client must first authenticate itself with the proxy. The proxy MUST
return a Proxy-Authenticate header field (section 14.33) containing a
challenge applicable to the proxy for the requested resource. The
client MAY repeat the request with a suitable Proxy-Authorization
header field (section 14.34). HTTP access authentication is explained
in "HTTP Authentication: Basic and Digest Access Authentication"
The client did not produce a request within the time that the server
was prepared to wait. The client MAY repeat the request without
modifications at any later time.
The request could not be completed due to a conflict with the current
state of the resource. This code is only allowed in situations where
it is expected that the user might be able to resolve the conflict
and resubmit the request. The response body SHOULD include enough
information for the user to recognize the source of the conflict.
Ideally, the response entity would include enough information for the
user or user agent to fix the problem; however, that might not be
possible and is not required.
Conflicts are most likely to occur in response to a PUT request. For
example, if versioning were being used and the entity being PUT
included changes to a resource which conflict with those made by an
earlier (third-party) request, the server might use the 409 response
to indicate that it can't complete the request. In this case, the
response entity would likely contain a list of the differences
between the two versions in a format defined by the response
The requested resource is no longer available at the server and no
forwarding address is known. This condition is expected to be
considered permanent. Clients with link editing capabilities SHOULD
delete references to the Request-URI after user approval. If the
server does not know, or has no facility to determine, whether or not
the condition is permanent, the status code 404 (Not Found) SHOULD be
used instead. This response is cacheable unless indicated otherwise.
The 410 response is primarily intended to assist the task of web
maintenance by notifying the recipient that the resource is
intentionally unavailable and that the server owners desire that
remote links to that resource be removed. Such an event is common for
limited-time, promotional services and for resources belonging to
individuals no longer working at the server's site. It is not
necessary to mark all permanently unavailable resources as "gone" or
to keep the mark for any length of time -- that is left to the
discretion of the server owner.
The server refuses to accept the request without a defined Content-
Length. The client MAY repeat the request if it adds a valid
Content-Length header field containing the length of the message-body
The precondition given in one or more of the request-header fields
evaluated to false when it was tested on the server. This response
code allows the client to place preconditions on the current resource
metainformation (header field data) and thus prevent the requested
method from being applied to a resource other than the one intended.
The server is refusing to process a request because the request
entity is larger than the server is willing or able to process. The
server MAY close the connection to prevent the client from continuing
If the condition is temporary, the server SHOULD include a Retry-
After header field to indicate that it is temporary and after what
time the client MAY try again.
The server is refusing to service the request because the Request-URI
is longer than the server is willing to interpret. This rare
condition is only likely to occur when a client has improperly
converted a POST request to a GET request with long query
information, when the client has descended into a URI "black hole" of
redirection (e.g., a redirected URI prefix that points to a suffix of
itself), or when the server is under attack by a client attempting to
exploit security holes present in some servers using fixed-length
buffers for reading or manipulating the Request-URI.
The server is refusing to service the request because the entity of
the request is in a format not supported by the requested resource
for the requested method.
A server SHOULD return a response with this status code if a request
included a Range request-header field (section 14.35), and none of
the range-specifier values in this field overlap the current extent
of the selected resource, and the request did not include an If-Range
request-header field. (For byte-ranges, this means that the first-
byte-pos of all of the byte-range-spec values were greater than the
current length of the selected resource.)
When this status code is returned for a byte-range request, the
response SHOULD include a Content-Range entity-header field
specifying the current length of the selected resource (see section
14.16). This response MUST NOT use the multipart/byteranges content-
The expectation given in an Expect request-header field (see section
14.20) could not be met by this server, or, if the server is a proxy,
the server has unambiguous evidence that the request could not be met
Response status codes beginning with the digit "5" indicate cases in
which the server is aware that it has erred or is incapable of
performing the request. Except when responding to a HEAD request, the
server SHOULD include an entity containing an explanation of the
condition. User agents SHOULD display any included entity to the
user. These response codes are applicable to any request method.
The server encountered an unexpected condition which prevented it
from fulfilling the request.
The server does not support the functionality required to fulfill the
request. This is the appropriate response when the server does not
recognize the request method and is not capable of supporting it for
The server, while acting as a gateway or proxy, received an invalid
response from the upstream server it accessed in attempting to
The server is currently unable to handle the request due to a
temporary overloading or maintenance of the server. The implication
is that this is a temporary condition which will be alleviated after
some delay. If known, the length of the delay MAY be indicated in a
Retry-After header. If no Retry-After is given, the client SHOULD
handle the response as it would for a 500 response.
Note: The existence of the 503 status code does not imply that a
server must use it when becoming overloaded. Some servers may wish
to simply refuse the connection.
The server, while acting as a gateway or proxy, did not receive a
timely response from the upstream server specified by the URI (e.g.
HTTP, FTP, LDAP) or some other auxiliary server (e.g. DNS) it needed
to access in attempting to complete the request.
Note: Note to implementors: some deployed proxies are known to
return 400 or 500 when DNS lookups time out.
The server does not support, or refuses to support, the HTTP protocol
version that was used in the request message. The server is
indicating that it is unable or unwilling to complete the request
using the same major version as the client, as described in section
3.1, other than with this error message. The response SHOULD contain
an entity describing why that version is not supported and what other
protocols are supported by that server.
HTTP provides several OPTIONAL challenge-response authentication
mechanisms which can be used by a server to challenge a client
request and by a client to provide authentication information. The
general framework for access authentication, and the specification of
"basic" and "digest" authentication, are specified in "HTTP
Authentication: Basic and Digest Access Authentication" [43]. This
specification adopts the definitions of "challenge" and "credentials"
from that specification.
Most HTTP responses include an entity which contains information for
interpretation by a human user. Naturally, it is desirable to supply
the user with the "best available" entity corresponding to the
request. Unfortunately for servers and caches, not all users have the
same preferences for what is "best," and not all user agents are
equally capable of rendering all entity types. For that reason, HTTP
has provisions for several mechanisms for "content negotiation" --
the process of selecting the best representation for a given response
when there are multiple representations available.
Note: This is not called "format negotiation" because the
alternate representations may be of the same media type, but use
different capabilities of that type, be in different languages,
Any response containing an entity-body MAY be subject to negotiation,
including error responses.
There are two kinds of content negotiation which are possible in
HTTP: server-driven and agent-driven negotiation. These two kinds of
negotiation are orthogonal and thus may be used separately or in
combination. One method of combination, referred to as transparent
negotiation, occurs when a cache uses the agent-driven negotiation
information provided by the origin server in order to provide
server-driven negotiation for subsequent requests.
If the selection of the best representation for a response is made by
an algorithm located at the server, it is called server-driven
negotiation. Selection is based on the available representations of
the response (the dimensions over which it can vary; e.g. language,
content-coding, etc.) and the contents of particular header fields in
the request message or on other information pertaining to the request
(such as the network address of the client).
Server-driven negotiation is advantageous when the algorithm for
selecting from among the available representations is difficult to
describe to the user agent, or when the server desires to send its
"best guess" to the client along with the first response (hoping to
avoid the round-trip delay of a subsequent request if the "best
guess" is good enough for the user). In order to improve the server's
guess, the user agent MAY include request header fields (Accept,
Accept-Language, Accept-Encoding, etc.) which describe its
preferences for such a response.
Server-driven negotiation has disadvantages:
might be "best" for any given user, since that would require
complete knowledge of both the capabilities of the user agent
and the intended use for the response (e.g., does the user want
to view it on screen or print it on paper?).
request can be both very inefficient (given that only a small
percentage of responses have multiple representations) and a
potential violation of the user's privacy.
algorithms for generating responses to a request.
for multiple user's requests.
HTTP/1.1 includes the following request-header fields for enabling
server-driven negotiation through description of user agent
capabilities and user preferences: Accept (section 14.1), Accept-
Charset (section 14.2), Accept-Encoding (section 14.3), Accept-
Language (section 14.4), and User-Agent (section 14.43). However, an
origin server is not limited to these dimensions and MAY vary the
response based on any aspect of the request, including information
outside the request-header fields or within extension header fields
not defined by this specification.
The Vary  header field can be used to express the parameters the
server uses to select a representation that is subject to server-
driven negotiation. See section 13.6 for use of the Vary header field
by caches and section 14.44 for use of the Vary header field by
With agent-driven negotiation, selection of the best representation
for a response is performed by the user agent after receiving an
initial response from the origin server. Selection is based on a list
of the available representations of the response included within the
header fields or entity-body of the initial response, with each
representation identified by its own URI. Selection from among the
representations may be performed automatically (if the user agent is
capable of doing so) or manually by the user selecting from a
generated (possibly hypertext) menu.
Agent-driven negotiation is advantageous when the response would vary
over commonly-used dimensions (such as type, language, or encoding),
when the origin server is unable to determine a user agent's
capabilities from examining the request, and generally when public
caches are used to distribute server load and reduce network usage.
Agent-driven negotiation suffers from the disadvantage of needing a
second request to obtain the best alternate representation. This
second request is only efficient when caching is used. In addition,
this specification does not define any mechanism for supporting
automatic selection, though it also does not prevent any such
mechanism from being developed as an extension and used within
HTTP/1.1 defines the 300 (Multiple Choices) and 406 (Not Acceptable)
status codes for enabling agent-driven negotiation when the server is
unwilling or unable to provide a varying response using server-driven
Transparent negotiation is a combination of both server-driven and
agent-driven negotiation. When a cache is supplied with a form of the
list of available representations of the response (as in agent-driven
negotiation) and the dimensions of variance are completely understood
by the cache, then the cache becomes capable of performing server-
driven negotiation on behalf of the origin server for subsequent
requests on that resource.
Transparent negotiation has the advantage of distributing the
negotiation work that would otherwise be required of the origin
server and also removing the second request delay of agent-driven
negotiation when the cache is able to correctly guess the right
This specification does not define any mechanism for transparent
negotiation, though it also does not prevent any such mechanism from
being developed as an extension that could be used within HTTP/1.1.
HTTP is typically used for distributed information systems, where
performance can be improved by the use of response caches. The
HTTP/1.1 protocol includes a number of elements intended to make
caching work as well as possible. Because these elements are
inextricable from other aspects of the protocol, and because they
interact with each other, it is useful to describe the basic caching
design of HTTP separately from the detailed descriptions of methods,
headers, response codes, etc.
Caching would be useless if it did not significantly improve
performance. The goal of caching in HTTP/1.1 is to eliminate the need
to send requests in many cases, and to eliminate the need to send
full responses in many other cases. The former reduces the number of
network round-trips required for many operations; we use an
"expiration" mechanism for this purpose (see section 13.2). The
latter reduces network bandwidth requirements; we use a "validation"
mechanism for this purpose (see section 13.3).
Requirements for performance, availability, and disconnected
operation require us to be able to relax the goal of semantic
transparency. The HTTP/1.1 protocol allows origin servers, caches,
and clients to explicitly reduce transparency when necessary.
However, because non-transparent operation may confuse non-expert
users, and might be incompatible with certain server applications
(such as those for ordering merchandise), the protocol requires that
transparency be relaxed
- only by an explicit protocol-level request when relaxed by
client or origin server
- only with an explicit warning to the end user when relaxed by
Therefore, the HTTP/1.1 protocol provides these important elements:
this is required by all parties.
explicitly request and control non-transparent operation.
responses that do not preserve the requested approximation of
semantic transparency.
A basic principle is that it must be possible for the clients to
detect any potential relaxation of semantic transparency.
Note: The server, cache, or client implementor might be faced with
design decisions not explicitly discussed in this specification.
If a decision might affect semantic transparency, the implementor
ought to err on the side of maintaining transparency unless a
careful and complete analysis shows significant benefits in
breaking transparency.
A correct cache MUST respond to a request with the most up-to-date
response held by the cache that is appropriate to the request (see
would have returned by revalidating the response with the
this means it meets the least restrictive freshness requirement
of the client, origin server, and cache (see section 14.9); if
the origin server so specifies, it is the freshness requirement
of the origin server alone.
If a stored response is not "fresh enough" by the most
restrictive freshness requirement of both the client and the
origin server, in carefully considered circumstances the cache
MAY still return the response with the appropriate Warning
is prohibited (e.g., by a "no-store" cache-directive, or by a
"no-cache" cache-request-directive; see section 14.9).
or error (4xx or 5xx) response message.
If the cache can not communicate with the origin server, then a
correct cache SHOULD respond as above if the response can be
correctly served from the cache; if not it MUST return an error or
warning indicating that there was a communication failure.
If a cache receives a response (either an entire response, or a 304
(Not Modified) response) that it would normally forward to the
requesting client, and the received response is no longer fresh, the
cache SHOULD forward it to the requesting client without adding a new
Warning (but without removing any existing Warning headers). A cache
SHOULD NOT attempt to revalidate a response simply because that
response became stale in transit; this might lead to an infinite
loop. A user agent that receives a stale response without a Warning
MAY display a warning indication to the user.
Whenever a cache returns a response that is neither first-hand nor
"fresh enough" (in the sense of condition 2 in section 13.1.1), it
MUST attach a warning to that effect, using a Warning general-header.
The Warning header and the currently defined warnings are described
in section 14.46. The warning allows clients to take appropriate
Warnings MAY be used for other purposes, both cache-related and
otherwise. The use of a warning, rather than an error status code,
distinguish these responses from true failures.
Warnings are assigned three digit warn-codes. The first digit
indicates whether the Warning MUST or MUST NOT be deleted from a
stored cache entry after a successful revalidation:
1xx  Warnings that describe the freshness or revalidation status of
the response, and so MUST be deleted after a successful
revalidation. 1XX warn-codes MAY be generated by a cache only when
validating a cached entry. It MUST NOT be generated by clients.
2xx  Warnings that describe some aspect of the entity body or entity
headers that is not rectified by a revalidation (for example, a
lossy compression of the entity bodies) and which MUST NOT be
deleted after a successful revalidation.
See section 14.46 for the definitions of the codes themselves.
HTTP/1.0 caches will cache all Warnings in responses, without
deleting the ones in the first category. Warnings in responses that
are passed to HTTP/1.0 caches carry an extra warning-date field,
which prevents a future HTTP/1.1 recipient from believing an
erroneously cached Warning.
Warnings also carry a warning text. The text MAY be in any
appropriate natural language (perhaps based on the client's Accept
headers), and include an OPTIONAL indication of what character set is
Multiple warnings MAY be attached to a response (either by the origin
server or by a cache), including multiple warnings with the same code
number. For example, a server might provide the same warning with
texts in both English and Basque.
When multiple warnings are attached to a response, it might not be
practical or reasonable to display all of them to the user. This
version of HTTP does not specify strict priority rules for deciding
which warnings to display and in what order, but does suggest some
The basic cache mechanisms in HTTP/1.1 (server-specified expiration
times and validators) are implicit directives to caches. In some
cases, a server or client might need to provide explicit directives
to the HTTP caches. We use the Cache-Control header for this purpose.
The Cache-Control header allows a client or server to transmit a
variety of directives in either requests or responses. These
directives typically override the default caching algorithms. As a
general rule, if there is any apparent conflict between header
values, the most restrictive interpretation is applied (that is, the
one that is most likely to preserve semantic transparency). However,
in some cases, cache-control directives are explicitly specified as
weakening the approximation of semantic transparency (for example,
The cache-control directives are described in detail in section 14.9.
Many user agents make it possible for users to override the basic
caching mechanisms. For example, the user agent might allow the user
to specify that cached entities (even explicitly stale ones) are
never validated. Or the user agent might habitually add "Cache-
Control: max-stale=3600" to every request. The user agent SHOULD NOT
default to either non-transparent behavior, or behavior that results
in abnormally ineffective caching, but MAY be explicitly configured
to do so by an explicit action of the user.
If the user has overridden the basic caching mechanisms, the user
agent SHOULD explicitly indicate to the user whenever this results in
the display of information that might not meet the server's
transparency requirements (in particular, if the displayed entity is
known to be stale). Since the protocol normally allows the user agent
to determine if responses are stale or not, this indication need only
be displayed when this actually happens. The indication need not be a
dialog box; it could be an icon (for example, a picture of a rotting
fish) or some other indicator.
If the user has overridden the caching mechanisms in a way that would
abnormally reduce the effectiveness of caches, the user agent SHOULD
continually indicate this state to the user (for example, by a
display of a picture of currency in flames) so that the user does not
inadvertently consume excess resources or suffer from excessive
In some cases, the operator of a cache MAY choose to configure it to
return stale responses even when not requested by clients. This
decision ought not be made lightly, but may be necessary for reasons
of availability or performance, especially when the cache is poorly
connected to the origin server. Whenever a cache returns a stale
response, it MUST mark it as such (using a Warning header) enabling
the client software to alert the user that there might be a potential
It also allows the user agent to take steps to obtain a first-hand or
fresh response. For this reason, a cache SHOULD NOT return a stale
response if the client explicitly requests a first-hand or fresh one,
unless it is impossible to comply for technical or policy reasons.
While the origin server (and to a lesser extent, intermediate caches,
by their contribution to the age of a response) are the primary
source of expiration information, in some cases the client might need
to control a cache's decision about whether to return a cached
response without validating it. Clients do this using several
directives of the Cache-Control header.
A client's request MAY specify the maximum age it is willing to
accept of an unvalidated response; specifying a value of zero forces
the cache(s) to revalidate all responses. A client MAY also specify
the minimum time remaining before a response expires. Both of these
options increase constraints on the behavior of caches, and so cannot
further relax the cache's approximation of semantic transparency.
A client MAY also specify that it will accept stale responses, up to
some maximum amount of staleness. This loosens the constraints on the
caches, and so might violate the origin server's specified
constraints on semantic transparency, but might be necessary to
support disconnected operation, or high availability in the face of
HTTP caching works best when caches can entirely avoid making
requests to the origin server. The primary mechanism for avoiding
requests is for an origin server to provide an explicit expiration
time in the future, indicating that a response MAY be used to satisfy
subsequent requests. In other words, a cache can return a fresh
response without first contacting the server.
Our expectation is that servers will assign future explicit
expiration times to responses in the belief that the entity is not
likely to change, in a semantically significant way, before the
expiration time is reached. This normally preserves semantic
transparency, as long as the server's expiration times are carefully
The expiration mechanism applies only to responses taken from a cache
and not to first-hand responses forwarded immediately to the
If an origin server wishes to force a semantically transparent cache
to validate every request, it MAY assign an explicit expiration time
in the past. This means that the response is always stale, and so the
cache SHOULD validate it before using it for subsequent requests. See
section 14.9.4 for a more restrictive way to force revalidation.
If an origin server wishes to force any HTTP/1.1 cache, no matter how
it is configured, to validate every request, it SHOULD use the "must-
revalidate" cache-control directive (see section 14.9).
Servers specify explicit expiration times using either the Expires
header, or the max-age directive of the Cache-Control header.
An expiration time cannot be used to force a user agent to refresh
its display or reload a resource; its semantics apply only to caching
mechanisms, and such mechanisms need only check a resource's
expiration status when a new request for that resource is initiated.
See section 13.13 for an explanation of the difference between caches
and history mechanisms.
Since origin servers do not always provide explicit expiration times,
HTTP caches typically assign heuristic expiration times, employing
algorithms that use other header values (such as the Last-Modified
time) to estimate a plausible expiration time. The HTTP/1.1
specification does not provide specific algorithms, but does impose
worst-case constraints on their results. Since heuristic expiration
times might compromise semantic transparency, they ought to used
cautiously, and we encourage origin servers to provide explicit
expiration times as much as possible.
In order to know if a cached entry is fresh, a cache needs to know if
its age exceeds its freshness lifetime. We discuss how to calculate
the latter in section 13.2.4; this section describes how to calculate
the age of a response or cache entry.
In this discussion, we use the term "now" to mean "the current value
of the clock at the host performing the calculation." Hosts that use
HTTP, but especially hosts running origin servers and caches, SHOULD
use NTP [28] or some similar protocol to synchronize their clocks to
a globally accurate time standard.
HTTP/1.1 requires origin servers to send a Date header, if possible,
with every response, giving the time at which the response was
generated (see section 14.18). We use the term "date_value" to denote
the value of the Date header, in a form appropriate for arithmetic
HTTP/1.1 uses the Age response-header to convey the estimated age of
the response message when obtained from a cache. The Age field value
is the cache's estimate of the amount of time since the response was
generated or revalidated by the origin server.
In essence, the Age value is the sum of the time that the response
has been resident in each of the caches along the path from the
origin server, plus the amount of time it has been in transit along
We use the term "age_value" to denote the value of the Age header, in
a form appropriate for arithmetic operations.
A response's age can be calculated in two entirely independent ways:
synchronized to the origin server's clock. If the result is
negative, the result is replaced by zero.
Given that we have two independent ways to compute the age of a
response when it is received, we can combine these as
corrected_received_age = max(now - date_value, age_value)
and as long as we have either nearly synchronized clocks or all-
HTTP/1.1 paths, one gets a reliable (conservative) result.
Because of network-imposed delays, some significant interval might
pass between the time that a server generates a response and the time
it is received at the next outbound cache or client. If uncorrected,
this delay could result in improperly low ages.
Because the request that resulted in the returned Age value must have
been initiated prior to that Age value's generation, we can correct
for delays imposed by the network by recording the time at which the
request was initiated. Then, when an Age value is received, it MUST
be interpreted relative to the time the request was initiated, not
the time that the response was received. This algorithm results in
conservative behavior no matter how much delay is experienced. So, we
corrected_initial_age = corrected_received_age
where "request_time" is the time (according to the local clock) when
the request that elicited this response was sent.
Summary of age calculation algorithm, when a cache receives a
*      is the value of Age: header received by the cache with
*      is the value of the origin server's Date: header
*      is the (local) time when the cache made the request
*      is the (local) time when the cache received the
apparent_age = max(0, response_time - date_value);
corrected_received_age = max(apparent_age, age_value);
response_delay = response_time - request_time;
corrected_initial_age = corrected_received_age + response_delay;
resident_time = now - response_time;
current_age   = corrected_initial_age + resident_time;
The current_age of a cache entry is calculated by adding the amount
of time (in seconds) since the cache entry was last validated by the
origin server to the corrected_initial_age. When a response is
generated from a cache entry, the cache MUST include a single Age
header field in the response with a value equal to the cache entry's
The presence of an Age header field in a response implies that a
response is not first-hand. However, the converse is not true, since
the lack of an Age header field in a response does not imply that the
response is first-hand unless all caches along the request path are
compliant with HTTP/1.1 (i.e., older HTTP caches did not implement
In order to decide whether a response is fresh or stale, we need to
compare its freshness lifetime to its age. The age is calculated as
described in section 13.2.3; this section describes how to calculate
the freshness lifetime, and to determine if a response has expired.
In the discussion below, the values can be represented in any form
appropriate for arithmetic operations.
We use the term "expires_value" to denote the value of the Expires
header. We use the term "max_age_value" to denote an appropriate
value of the number of seconds carried by the "max-age" directive of
the Cache-Control header in a response (see section 14.9.3).
The max-age directive takes priority over Expires, so if max-age is
present in a response, the calculation is simply:
freshness_lifetime = max_age_value
Otherwise, if Expires is present in the response, the calculation is:
freshness_lifetime = expires_value - date_value
Note that neither of these calculations is vulnerable to clock skew,
since all of the information comes from the origin server.
If none of Expires, Cache-Control: max-age, or Cache-Control: s-
maxage (see section 14.9.3) appears in the response, and the response
does not include other restrictions on caching, the cache MAY compute
a freshness lifetime using a heuristic. The cache MUST attach Warning
has not already been added.
Also, if the response does have a Last-Modified time, the heuristic
expiration value SHOULD be no more than some fraction of the interval
since that time. A typical setting of this fraction might be 10%.
The calculation to determine if a response has expired is quite
response_is_fresh = (freshness_lifetime > current_age)
Because expiration values are assigned optimistically, it is possible
for two caches to contain fresh values for the same resource that are
If a client performing a retrieval receives a non-first-hand response
for a request that was already fresh in its own cache, and the Date
header in its existing cache entry is newer than the Date on the new
response, then the client MAY ignore the response. If so, it MAY
retry the request with a "Cache-Control: max-age=0" directive (see
section 14.9), to force a check with the origin server.
If a cache has two fresh responses for the same representation with
different validators, it MUST use the one with the more recent Date
header. This situation might arise because the cache is pooling
responses from other caches, or because a client has asked for a
reload or a revalidation of an apparently fresh cache entry.
Because a client might be receiving responses via multiple paths, so
that some responses flow through one set of caches and other
responses flow through a different set of caches, a client might
receive responses in an order different from that in which the origin
server sent them. We would like the client to use the most recently
generated response, even if older responses are still apparently
Neither the entity tag nor the expiration value can impose an
ordering on responses, since it is possible that a later response
intentionally carries an earlier expiration time. The Date values are
ordered to a granularity of one second.
When a client tries to revalidate a cache entry, and the response it
receives contains a Date header that appears to be older than the one
for the existing entry, then the client SHOULD repeat the request
unconditionally, and include
to force any intermediate caches to validate their copies directly
with the origin server, or
to force any intermediate caches to obtain a new copy from the origin
If the Date values are equal, then the client MAY use either response
(or MAY, if it is being extremely prudent, request a new response).
Servers MUST NOT depend on clients being able to choose
deterministically between responses generated during the same second,
if their expiration times overlap.
When a cache has a stale entry that it would like to use as a
response to a client's request, it first has to check with the origin
server (or possibly an intermediate cache with a fresh response) to
see if its cached entry is still usable. We call this "validating"
the cache entry. Since we do not want to have to pay the overhead of
retransmitting the full response if the cached entry is good, and we
do not want to pay the overhead of an extra round trip if the cached
entry is invalid, the HTTP/1.1 protocol supports the use of
The key protocol features for supporting conditional methods are
those concerned with "cache validators." When an origin server
generates a full response, it attaches some sort of validator to it,
which is kept with the cache entry. When a client (user agent or
proxy cache) makes a conditional request for a resource for which it
has a cache entry, it includes the associated validator in the
The server then checks that validator against the current validator
for the entity, and, if they match (see section 13.3.3), it responds
with a special status code (usually, 304 (Not Modified)) and no
entity-body. Otherwise, it returns a full response (including
entity-body). Thus, we avoid transmitting the full response if the
validator matches, and we avoid an extra round trip if it does not
In HTTP/1.1, a conditional request looks exactly the same as a normal
request for the same resource, except that it carries a special
header (which includes the validator) that implicitly turns the
method (usually, GET) into a conditional.
The protocol includes both positive and negative senses of cache-
validating conditions. That is, it is possible to request either that
a method be performed if and only if a validator matches or if and
only if no validators match.
Note: a response that lacks a validator may still be cached, and
served from cache until it expires, unless this is explicitly
prohibited by a cache-control directive. However, a cache cannot
do a conditional retrieval if it does not have a validator for the
entity, which means it will not be refreshable after it expires.
The Last-Modified entity-header field value is often used as a cache
validator. In simple terms, a cache entry is considered to be valid
if the entity has not been modified since the Last-Modified value.
The ETag response-header field value, an entity tag, provides for an
"opaque" cache validator. This might allow more reliable validation
in situations where it is inconvenient to store modification dates,
where the one-second resolution of HTTP date values is not
sufficient, or where the origin server wishes to avoid certain
paradoxes that might arise from the use of modification dates.
Entity Tags are described in section 3.11. The headers used with
Since both origin servers and caches will compare two validators to
decide if they represent the same or different entities, one normally
would expect that if the entity (the entity-body or any entity-
headers) changes in any way, then the associated validator would
change as well. If this is true, then we call this validator a
However, there might be cases when a server prefers to change the
validator only on semantically significant changes, and not when
insignificant aspects of the entity change. A validator that does not
always change when the resource changes is a "weak validator."
Entity tags are normally "strong validators," but the protocol
provides a mechanism to tag an entity tag as "weak." One can think of
a strong validator as one that changes whenever the bits of an entity
changes, while a weak value changes whenever the meaning of an entity
changes. Alternatively, one can think of a strong validator as part
of an identifier for a specific entity, while a weak validator is
part of an identifier for a set of semantically equivalent entities.
Note: One example of a strong validator is an integer that is
incremented in stable storage every time an entity is changed.
An entity's modification time, if represented with one-second
resolution, could be a weak validator, since it is possible that
the resource might be modified twice during a single second.
Support for weak validators is optional. However, weak validators
allow for more efficient caching of equivalent objects; for
example, a hit counter on a site is probably good enough if it is
updated every few days or weeks, and any value during that period
is likely "good enough" to be equivalent.
A "use" of a validator is either when a client generates a request
and includes the validator in a validating header field, or when a
server compares two validators.
Strong validators are usable in any context. Weak validators are only
usable in contexts that do not depend on exact equality of an entity.
For example, either kind is usable for a conditional GET of a full
entity. However, only a strong validator is usable for a sub-range
retrieval, since otherwise the client might end up with an internally
Clients MAY issue simple (non-subrange) GET requests with either weak
validators or strong validators. Clients MUST NOT use weak validators
in other forms of request.
The only function that the HTTP/1.1 protocol defines on validators is
comparison. There are two validator comparison functions, depending
on whether the comparison context allows the use of weak validators
- The strong comparison function: in order to be considered equal,
both validators MUST be identical in every way, and both MUST
- The weak comparison function: in order to be considered equal,
both validators MUST be identical in every way, but either or
both of them MAY be tagged as "weak" without affecting the
An entity tag is strong unless it is explicitly tagged as weak.
Section 3.11 gives the syntax for entity tags.
A Last-Modified time, when used as a validator in a request, is
implicitly weak unless it is possible to deduce that it is strong,
using the following rules:
- The validator is being compared by an origin server to the
actual current validator for the entity and,
- That origin server reliably knows that the associated entity did
not change twice during the second covered by the presented
- The validator is about to be used by a client in an If-
Modified-Since or If-Unmodified-Since header, because the client
has a cache entry for the associated entity, and
- That cache entry includes a Date value, which gives the time
when the origin server sent the original response, and
- The presented Last-Modified time is at least 60 seconds before
- The validator is being compared by an intermediate cache to the
validator stored in its cache entry for the entity, and
This method relies on the fact that if two different responses were
sent by the origin server during the same second, but both had the
same Last-Modified time, then at least one of those responses would
have a Date value equal to its Last-Modified time. The arbitrary 60-
second limit guards against the possibility that the Date and Last-
Modified values are generated from different clocks, or at somewhat
different times during the preparation of the response. An
implementation MAY use a value larger than 60 seconds, if it is
believed that 60 seconds is too short.
If a client wishes to perform a sub-range retrieval on a value for
which it has only a Last-Modified time and no opaque validator, it
MAY do this only if the Last-Modified time is strong in the sense
A cache or origin server receiving a conditional request, other than
a full-body GET request, MUST use the strong comparison function to
evaluate the condition.
These rules allow HTTP/1.1 caches and clients to safely perform sub-
range retrievals on values that have been obtained from HTTP/1.0
We adopt a set of rules and recommendations for origin servers,
clients, and caches regarding when various validator types ought to
be used, and for what purposes.
- SHOULD send an entity tag validator unless it is not feasible to
- MAY send a weak entity tag instead of a strong entity tag, if
performance considerations support the use of weak entity tags,
or if it is unfeasible to send a strong entity tag.
- SHOULD send a Last-Modified value if it is feasible to send one,
unless the risk of a breakdown in semantic transparency that
could result from using this date in an If-Modified-Since header
would lead to serious problems.
In other words, the preferred behavior for an HTTP/1.1 origin server
is to send both a strong entity tag and a Last-Modified value.
In order to be legal, a strong entity tag MUST change whenever the
associated entity value changes in any way. A weak entity tag SHOULD
change whenever the associated entity changes in a semantically
Note: in order to provide semantically transparent caching, an
origin server must avoid reusing a specific strong entity tag
value for two different entities, or reusing a specific weak
entity tag value for two semantically different entities. Cache
entries might persist for arbitrarily long periods, regardless of
expiration times, so it might be inappropriate to expect that a
cache will never again attempt to validate an entry using a
validator that it obtained at some point in the past.
- If an entity tag has been provided by the origin server, MUST
use that entity tag in any cache-conditional request (using If-
- If only a Last-Modified value has been provided by the origin
server, SHOULD use that value in non-subrange cache-conditional
requests (using If-Modified-Since).
- If only a Last-Modified value has been provided by an HTTP/1.0
origin server, MAY use that value in subrange cache-conditional
requests (using If-Unmodified-Since:). The user agent SHOULD
provide a way to disable this, in case of difficulty.
- If both an entity tag and a Last-Modified value have been
provided by the origin server, SHOULD use both validators in
cache-conditional requests. This allows both HTTP/1.0 and
HTTP/1.1 caches to respond appropriately.
An HTTP/1.1 origin server, upon receiving a conditional request that
includes both a Last-Modified date (e.g., in an If-Modified-Since or
If-Unmodified-Since header field) and one or more entity tags (e.g.,
in an If-Match, If-None-Match, or If-Range header field) as cache
validators, MUST NOT return a response status of 304 (Not Modified)
unless doing so is consistent with all of the conditional header
An HTTP/1.1 caching proxy, upon receiving a conditional request that
includes both a Last-Modified date and one or more entity tags as
cache validators, MUST NOT return a locally cached response to the
client unless that cached response is consistent with all of the
conditional header fields in the request.
Note: The general principle behind these rules is that HTTP/1.1
servers and clients should transmit as much non-redundant
information as is available in their responses and requests.
HTTP/1.1 systems receiving this information will make the most
conservative assumptions about the validators they receive.
HTTP/1.0 clients and caches will ignore entity tags. Generally,
last-modified values received or used by these systems will
support transparent and efficient caching, and so HTTP/1.1 origin
servers should provide Last-Modified values. In those rare cases
where the use of a Last-Modified value as a validator by an
HTTP/1.0 system could result in a serious problem, then HTTP/1.1
origin servers should not provide one.
The principle behind entity tags is that only the service author
knows the semantics of a resource well enough to select an
appropriate cache validation mechanism, and the specification of any
validator comparison function more complex than byte-equality would
open up a can of worms. Thus, comparisons of any other headers
(except Last-Modified, for compatibility with HTTP/1.0) are never
used for purposes of validating a cache entry.
Unless specifically constrained by a cache-control (section 14.9)
directive, a caching system MAY always store a successful response
(see section 13.8) as a cache entry, MAY return it without validation
if it is fresh, and MAY return it after successful validation. If
there is neither a cache validator nor an explicit expiration time
associated with a response, we do not expect it to be cached, but
certain caches MAY violate this expectation (for example, when little
or no network connectivity is available). A client can usually detect
that such a response was taken from a cache by comparing the Date
header to the current time.
Note: some HTTP/1.0 caches are known to violate this expectation
without providing any Warning.
However, in some cases it might be inappropriate for a cache to
retain an entity, or to return it in response to a subsequent
request. This might be because absolute semantic transparency is
deemed necessary by the service author, or because of security or
privacy considerations. Certain cache-control directives are
therefore provided so that the server can indicate that certain
resource entities, or portions thereof, are not to be cached
regardless of other considerations.
Note that section 14.8 normally prevents a shared cache from saving
and returning a response to a previous request if that request
included an Authorization header.
request, subject to the expiration mechanism, unless a cache-control
directive prohibits caching. However, a cache that does not support
the Range and Content-Range headers MUST NOT cache 206 (Partial
A response received with any other status code (e.g. status codes 302
and 307) MUST NOT be returned in a reply to a subsequent request
unless there are cache-control directives or another header(s) that
explicitly allow it. For example, these include the following: an
Expires header (section 14.21); a "max-age", "s-maxage",  "must-
revalidate", "proxy-revalidate", "public" or "private" cache-control
The purpose of an HTTP cache is to store information received in
response to requests for use in responding to future requests. In
many cases, a cache simply returns the appropriate parts of a
response to the requester. However, if the cache holds a cache entry
based on a previous response, it might have to combine parts of a new
response with what is held in the cache entry.
For the purpose of defining the behavior of caches and non-caching
proxies, we divide HTTP headers into two categories:
- End-to-end headers, which are  transmitted to the ultimate
recipient of a request or response. End-to-end headers in
responses MUST be stored as part of a cache entry and MUST be
transmitted in any response formed from a cache entry.
- Hop-by-hop headers, which are meaningful only for a single
transport-level connection, and are not stored by caches or
The following HTTP/1.1 headers are hop-by-hop headers:
All other headers defined by HTTP/1.1 are end-to-end headers.
Other hop-by-hop headers MUST be listed in a Connection header,
(section 14.10) to be introduced into HTTP/1.1 (or later).
Some features of the HTTP/1.1 protocol, such as Digest
Authentication, depend on the value of certain end-to-end headers. A
transparent proxy SHOULD NOT modify an end-to-end header unless the
definition of that header requires or specifically allows that.
A transparent proxy MUST NOT modify any of the following fields in a
request or response, and it MUST NOT add any of these fields if not
but it MAY add any of these fields if not already present. If an
Expires header is added, it MUST be given a field-value identical to
that of the Date header in that response.
A  proxy MUST NOT modify or add any of the following fields in a
message that contains the no-transform cache-control directive, or in
A non-transparent proxy MAY modify or add these fields to a message
that does not include no-transform, but if it does so, it MUST add a
Warning 214 (Transformation applied) if one does not already appear
in the message (see section 14.46).
Warning: unnecessary modification of end-to-end headers might
cause authentication failures if stronger authentication
mechanisms are introduced in later versions of HTTP. Such
authentication mechanisms MAY rely on the values of header fields
The Content-Length field of a request or response is added or deleted
according to the rules in section 4.4. A transparent proxy MUST
preserve the entity-length (section 7.2.2) of the entity-body,
although it MAY change the transfer-length (section 4.4).
When a cache makes a validating request to a server, and the server
provides a 304 (Not Modified) response or a 206 (Partial Content)
response, the cache then constructs a response to send to the
If the status code is 304 (Not Modified), the cache uses the entity-
body stored in the cache entry as the entity-body of this outgoing
response. If the status code is 206 (Partial Content) and the ETag or
Last-Modified headers match exactly, the cache MAY combine the
contents stored in the cache entry with the new contents received in
the response and use the result as the entity-body of this outgoing
The end-to-end headers stored in the cache entry are used for the
constructed response, except that
- any stored Warning headers with warn-code 1xx (see section
14.46) MUST be deleted from the cache entry and the forwarded
- any stored Warning headers with warn-code 2xx MUST be retained
in the cache entry and the forwarded response.
- any end-to-end headers provided in the 304 or 206 response MUST
replace the corresponding headers from the cache entry.
Unless the cache decides to remove the cache entry, it MUST also
replace the end-to-end headers stored with the cache entry with
corresponding headers received in the incoming response, except for
Warning headers as described immediately above. If a header field-
name in the incoming response matches more than one header in the
cache entry, all such old headers MUST be replaced.
In other words, the set of end-to-end headers received in the
incoming response overrides all corresponding end-to-end headers
stored with the cache entry (except for stored Warning headers with
warn-code 1xx, which are deleted even if not overridden).
Note: this rule allows an origin server to use a 304 (Not
Modified) or a 206 (Partial Content) response to update any header
associated with a previous response for the same entity or sub-
ranges thereof, although it might not always be meaningful or
correct to do so. This rule does not allow an origin server to use
a 304 (Not Modified) or a 206 (Partial Content) response to
entirely delete a header that it had provided with a previous
A response might transfer only a subrange of the bytes of an entity-
body, either because the request included one or more Range
specifications, or because a connection was broken prematurely. After
several such transfers, a cache might have received several ranges of
If a cache has a stored non-empty set of subranges for an entity, and
an incoming response transfers another subrange, the cache MAY
combine the new subrange with the existing set if both the following
- Both the incoming response and the cache entry have a cache
- The two cache validators match using the strong comparison
If either requirement is not met, the cache MUST use only the most
recent partial response (based on the Date values transmitted with
every response, and using the incoming response if these values are
equal or missing), and MUST discard the other partial information.
Use of server-driven content negotiation (section 12.1), as indicated
by the presence of a Vary header field in a response, alters the
conditions and procedure by which a cache can use the response for
subsequent requests. See section 14.44 for use of the Vary header
A server SHOULD use the Vary header field to inform a cache of what
request-header fields were used to select among multiple
representations of a cacheable response subject to server-driven
negotiation. The set of header fields named by the Vary field value
is known as the "selecting" request-headers.
When the cache receives a subsequent request whose Request-URI
specifies one or more cache entries including a Vary header field,
the cache MUST NOT use such a cache entry to construct a response to
the new request unless all of the selecting request-headers present
in the new request match the corresponding stored request-headers in
The selecting request-headers from two requests are defined to match
if and only if the selecting request-headers in the first request can
be transformed to the selecting request-headers in the second request
by adding or removing linear white space (LWS) at places where this
is allowed by the corresponding BNF, and/or combining multiple
message-header fields with the same field name following the rules
about message headers in section 4.2.
A Vary header field-value of "*" always fails to match and subsequent
requests on that resource can only be properly interpreted by the
If the selecting request header fields for the cached entry do not
match the selecting request header fields of the new request, then
the cache MUST NOT use a cached entry to satisfy the request unless
it first relays the new request to the origin server in a conditional
request and the server responds with 304 (Not Modified), including an
entity tag or Content-Location that indicates the entity to be used.
If an entity tag was assigned to a cached representation, the
forwarded request SHOULD be conditional and include the entity tags
in an If-None-Match header field from all its cache entries for the
resource. This conveys to the server the set of entities currently
held by the cache, so that if any one of these entities matches the
requested entity, the server can use the ETag header field in its 304
(Not Modified) response to tell the cache which entry is appropriate.
If the entity-tag of the new response matches that of an existing
entry, the new response SHOULD be used to update the header fields of
the existing entry, and the result MUST be returned to the client.
If any of the existing cache entries contains only partial content
for the associated entity, its entity-tag SHOULD NOT be included in
the If-None-Match header field unless the request is for a range that
would be fully satisfied by that entry.
If a cache receives a successful response whose Content-Location
field matches that of an existing cache entry for the same Request-
]URI, whose entity-tag differs from that of the existing entry, and
whose Date is more recent than that of the existing entry, the
existing entry SHOULD NOT be returned in response to future requests
and SHOULD be deleted from the cache.
For reasons of security and privacy, it is necessary to make a
distinction between "shared" and "non-shared" caches. A non-shared
cache is one that is accessible only to a single user. Accessibility
in this case SHOULD be enforced by appropriate security mechanisms.
All other caches are considered to be "shared." Other sections of
this specification place certain constraints on the operation of
shared caches in order to prevent loss of privacy or failure of
A cache that receives an incomplete response (for example, with fewer
bytes of data than specified in a Content-Length header) MAY store
the response. However, the cache MUST treat this as a partial
response. Partial responses MAY be combined as described in section
13.5.4; the result might be a full response or might still be
partial. A cache MUST NOT return a partial response to a client
without explicitly marking it as such, using the 206 (Partial
Content) status code. A cache MUST NOT return a partial response
using a status code of 200 (OK).
If a cache receives a 5xx response while attempting to revalidate an
entry, it MAY either forward this response to the requesting client,
or act as if the server failed to respond. In the latter case, it MAY
return a previously received response unless the cached entry
includes the "must-revalidate" cache-control directive (see section
Unless the origin server explicitly prohibits the caching of their
responses, the application of GET and HEAD methods to any resources
SHOULD NOT have side effects that would lead to erroneous behavior if
these responses are taken from a cache. They MAY still have side
effects, but a cache is not required to consider such side effects in
its caching decisions. Caches are always expected to observe an
origin server's explicit restrictions on caching.
We note one exception to this rule: since some applications have
traditionally used GETs and HEADs with query URLs (those containing a
"?" in the rel_path part) to perform operations with significant side
effects, caches MUST NOT treat responses to such URIs as fresh unless
the server provides an explicit expiration time. This specifically
means that responses from HTTP/1.0 servers for such URIs SHOULD NOT
be taken from a cache. See section 9.1.1 for related information.
The effect of certain methods performed on a resource at the origin
server might cause one or more existing cache entries to become non-
transparently invalid. That is, although they might continue to be
"fresh," they do not accurately reflect what the origin server would
return for a new request on that resource.
There is no way for the HTTP protocol to guarantee that all such
cache entries are marked invalid. For example, the request that
caused the change at the origin server might not have gone through
the proxy where a cache entry is stored. However, several rules help
reduce the likelihood of erroneous behavior.
In this section, the phrase "invalidate an entity" means that the
cache will either remove all instances of that entity from its
storage, or will mark these as "invalid" and in need of a mandatory
revalidation before they can be returned in response to a subsequent
Some HTTP methods MUST cause a cache to invalidate an entity. This is
either the entity referred to by the Request-URI, or by the Location
or Content-Location headers (if present). These methods are:
In order to prevent denial of service attacks, an invalidation based
on the URI in a Location or Content-Location header MUST only be
performed if the host part is the same as in the Request-URI.
A cache that passes through requests for methods it does not
understand SHOULD invalidate any entities referred to by the
All methods that might be expected to cause modifications to the
origin server's resources MUST be written through to the origin
server. This currently includes all methods except for GET and HEAD.
A cache MUST NOT reply to such a request from a client before having
transmitted the request to the inbound server, and having received a
corresponding response from the inbound server. This does not prevent
a proxy cache from sending a 100 (Continue) response before the
inbound server has sent its final reply.
The alternative (known as "write-back" or "copy-back" caching) is not
allowed in HTTP/1.1, due to the difficulty of providing consistent
updates and the problems arising from server, cache, or network
failure prior to write-back.
response is received from a resource while any existing responses for
the same resource are cached, the cache SHOULD use the new response
to reply to the current request. It MAY insert it into cache storage
and MAY, if it meets all other requirements, use it to respond to any
future requests that would previously have caused the old response to
be returned. If it inserts the new response into cache storage  the
Note: a new response that has an older Date header value than
existing cached responses is not cacheable.
User agents often have history mechanisms, such as "Back" buttons and
history lists, which can be used to redisplay an entity retrieved
History mechanisms and caches are different. In particular history
mechanisms SHOULD NOT try to show a semantically transparent view of
the current state of a resource. Rather, a history mechanism is meant
to show exactly what the user saw at the time when the resource was
By default, an expiration time does not apply to history mechanisms.
If the entity is still in storage, a history mechanism SHOULD display
it even if the entity has expired, unless the user has specifically
configured the agent to refresh expired history documents.
This is not to be construed to prohibit the history mechanism from
telling the user that a view might be stale.
Note: if history list mechanisms unnecessarily prevent users from
viewing stale resources, this will tend to force service authors
to avoid using HTTP expiration controls and cache controls when
they would otherwise like to. Service authors may consider it
important that users not be presented with error messages or
warning messages when they use navigation controls (such as BACK)
to view previously fetched resources. Even though sometimes such
resources ought not to cached, or ought to expire quickly, user
interface considerations may force service authors to resort to
other means of preventing caching (e.g. "once-only" URLs) in order
not to suffer the effects of improperly functioning history
This section defines the syntax and semantics of all standard
HTTP/1.1 header fields. For entity-header fields, both sender and
recipient refer to either the client or the server, depending on who
sends and who receives the entity.
The Accept request-header field can be used to specify certain media
types which are acceptable for the response. Accept headers can be
used to indicate that the request is specifically limited to a small
set of desired types, as in the case of a request for an in-line
The asterisk "*" character is used to group media types into ranges,
with "*/*" indicating all media types and "type/*" indicating all
subtypes of that type. The media-range MAY include media type
parameters that are applicable to that range.
Each media-range MAY be followed by one or more accept-params,
beginning with the "q" parameter for indicating a relative quality
factor. The first "q" parameter (if any) separates the media-range
parameter(s) from the accept-params. Quality factors allow the user
or user agent to indicate the relative degree of preference for that
media-range, using the qvalue scale from 0 to 1 (section 3.9). The
Note: Use of the "q" parameter name to separate media type
parameters from Accept extension parameters is due to historical
practice. Although this prevents any media type parameter named
"q" from being used with a media range, such an event is believed
to be unlikely given the lack of any "q" parameters in the IANA
media type registry and the rare usage of any media type
parameters in Accept. Future media types are discouraged from
registering any parameter named "q".
SHOULD be interpreted as "I prefer audio/basic, but send me any audio
type if it is the best available after an 80% mark-down in quality."
If no Accept header field is present, then it is assumed that the
client accepts all media types. If an Accept header field is present,
and if the server cannot send a response which is acceptable
according to the combined Accept field value, then the server SHOULD
send a 406 (not acceptable) response.
A more elaborate example is
Verbally, this would be interpreted as "text/html and text/x-c are
the preferred media types, but if they do not exist, then send the
text/x-dvi entity, and if that does not exist, send the text/plain
Media ranges can be overridden by more specific media ranges or
specific media types. If more than one media range applies to a given
type, the most specific reference has precedence. For example,
Accept: text/*, text/html, text/html;level=1, */*
have the following precedence:
The media type quality factor associated with a given type is
determined by finding the media range with the highest precedence
which matches that type. For example,
would cause the following values to be associated:
Note: A user agent might be provided with a default set of quality
values for certain media ranges. However, unless the user agent is
a closed system which cannot interact with other rendering agents,
this default set ought to be configurable by the user.
The Accept-Charset request-header field can be used to indicate what
character sets are acceptable for the response. This field allows
clients capable of understanding more comprehensive or special-
purpose character sets to signal that capability to a server which is
capable of representing documents in those character sets.
Accept-Charset = "Accept-Charset" ":"
Character set values are described in section 3.4. Each charset MAY
be given an associated quality value which represents the user's
preference for that charset. The default value is q=1. An example is
The special value "*", if present in the Accept-Charset field,
matches every character set (including ISO-8859-1) which is not
mentioned elsewhere in the Accept-Charset field. If no "*" is present
in an Accept-Charset field, then all character sets not explicitly
mentioned get a quality value of 0, except for ISO-8859-1, which gets
a quality value of 1 if not explicitly mentioned.
If no Accept-Charset header is present, the default is that any
character set is acceptable. If an Accept-Charset header is present,
according to the Accept-Charset header, then the server SHOULD send
an error response with the 406 (not acceptable) status code, though
the sending of an unacceptable response is also allowed.
The Accept-Encoding request-header field is similar to Accept, but
restricts the content-codings (section 3.5) that are acceptable in
Accept-Encoding  = "Accept-Encoding" ":"
Accept-Encoding: compress, gzip
Accept-Encoding: compress;q=0.5, gzip;q=1.0
A server tests whether a content-coding is acceptable, according to
an Accept-Encoding field, using these rules:
the Accept-Encoding field, then it is acceptable, unless it is
accompanied by a qvalue of 0. (As defined in section 3.9, a
qvalue of 0 means "not acceptable.")
available content-coding not explicitly listed in the header
content-coding with the highest non-zero qvalue is preferred.
specifically refused because the Accept-Encoding field includes
"identity;q=0", or because the field includes "*;q=0" and does
not explicitly include the "identity" content-coding. If the
Accept-Encoding field-value is empty, then only the "identity"
encoding is acceptable.
If an Accept-Encoding field is present in a request, and if the
server cannot send a response which is acceptable according to the
Accept-Encoding header, then the server SHOULD send an error response
with the 406 (Not Acceptable) status code.
If no Accept-Encoding field is present in a request, the server MAY
assume that the client will accept any content coding. In this case,
if "identity" is one of the available content-codings, then the
server SHOULD use the "identity" content-coding, unless it has
additional information that a different content-coding is meaningful
Note: If the request does not include an Accept-Encoding field,
and if the "identity" content-coding is unavailable, then
content-codings commonly understood by HTTP/1.0 clients (i.e.,
"gzip" and "compress") are preferred; some older clients
improperly display messages sent with other content-codings.  The
server might also make this decision based on information about
the particular user-agent or client.
Note: Most HTTP/1.0 applications do not recognize or obey qvalues
associated with content-codings. This means that qvalues will not
work and are not permitted with x-gzip or x-compress.
The Accept-Language request-header field is similar to Accept, but
restricts the set of natural languages that are preferred as a
response to the request. Language tags are defined in section 3.10.
Accept-Language = "Accept-Language" ":"
Each language-range MAY be given an associated quality value which
represents an estimate of the user's preference for the languages
specified by that range. The quality value defaults to "q=1". For
would mean: "I prefer Danish, but will accept British English and
other types of English." A language-range matches a language-tag if
it exactly equals the tag, or if it exactly equals a prefix of the
tag such that the first tag character following the prefix is "-".
The special range "*", if present in the Accept-Language field,
matches every tag not matched by any other range present in the
Note: This use of a prefix matching rule does not imply that
language tags are assigned to languages in such a way that it is
always true that if a user understands a language with a certain
tag, then this user will also understand all languages with tags
for which this tag is a prefix. The prefix rule simply allows the
use of prefix tags if this is the case.
The language quality factor assigned to a language-tag by the
Accept-Language field is the quality value of the longest language-
range in the field that matches the language-tag. If no language-
range in the field matches the tag, the language quality factor
assigned is 0. If no Accept-Language header is present in the
SHOULD assume that all languages are equally acceptable. If an
Accept-Language header is present, then all languages which are
assigned a quality factor greater than 0 are acceptable.
It might be contrary to the privacy expectations of the user to send
an Accept-Language header with the complete linguistic preferences of
the user in every request. For a discussion of this issue, see
As intelligibility is highly dependent on the individual user, it is
recommended that client applications make the choice of linguistic
preference available to the user. If the choice is not made
available, then the Accept-Language header field MUST NOT be given in
Note: When making the choice of linguistic preference available to
the user, we remind implementors of  the fact that users are not
familiar with the details of language matching as described above,
and should provide appropriate guidance. As an example, users
might assume that on selecting "en-gb", they will be served any
kind of English document if British English is not available. A
user agent might suggest in such a case to add "en" to get the
best matching behavior.
The Accept-Ranges response-header field allows the server to
indicate its acceptance of range requests for a resource:
Accept-Ranges     = "Accept-Ranges" ":" acceptable-ranges
acceptable-ranges = 1#range-unit | "none"
Origin servers that accept byte-range requests MAY send
but are not required to do so. Clients MAY generate byte-range
requests without having received this header for the resource
involved. Range units are defined in section 3.12.
Servers that do not accept any kind of range request for a
to advise the client not to attempt a range request.
The Age response-header field conveys the sender's estimate of the
amount of time since the response (or its revalidation) was
generated at the origin server. A cached response is "fresh" if
its age does not exceed its freshness lifetime. Age values are
calculated as specified in section 13.2.3.
age-value = delta-seconds
Age values are non-negative decimal integers, representing time in
If a cache receives a value larger than the largest positive
integer it can represent, or if any of its age calculations
overflows, it MUST transmit an Age header with a value of
include an Age header field in every response generated from its
own cache. Caches SHOULD use an arithmetic type of at least 31
The Allow entity-header field lists the set of methods supported
by the resource identified by the Request-URI. The purpose of this
field is strictly to inform the recipient of valid methods
associated with the resource. An Allow header field MUST be
present in a 405 (Method Not Allowed) response.
This field cannot prevent a client from trying other methods.
However, the indications given by the Allow header field value
SHOULD be followed. The actual set of allowed methods is defined
by the origin server at the time of each request.
The Allow header field MAY be provided with a PUT request to
recommend the methods to be supported by the new or modified
resource. The server is not required to support these methods and
SHOULD include an Allow header in the response giving the actual
A proxy MUST NOT modify the Allow header field even if it does not
understand all the methods specified, since the user agent might
have other means of communicating with the origin server.
A user agent that wishes to authenticate itself with a server--
usually, but not necessarily, after receiving a 401 response--does
so by including an Authorization request-header field with the
request.  The Authorization field value consists of credentials
containing the authentication information of the user agent for
the realm of the resource being requested.
Authorization  = "Authorization" ":" credentials
HTTP access authentication is described in "HTTP Authentication:
Basic and Digest Access Authentication" [43]. If a request is
authenticated and a realm specified, the same credentials SHOULD
be valid for all other requests within this realm (assuming that
the authentication scheme itself does not require otherwise, such
as credentials that vary according to a challenge value or using
When a shared cache (see section 13.7) receives a request
containing an Authorization field, it MUST NOT return the
corresponding response as a reply to any other request, unless one
of the following specific exceptions holds:
directive, the cache MAY use that response in replying to a
subsequent request. But (if the specified maximum age has
passed) a proxy cache MUST first revalidate it with the origin
server, using the request-headers from the new request to allow
the origin server to authenticate the new request. (This is the
defined behavior for s-maxage.) If the response includes "s-
maxage=0", the proxy MUST always revalidate it before re-using
subsequent request. But if the response is stale, all caches
MUST first revalidate it with the origin server, using the
request-headers from the new request to allow the origin server
to authenticate the new request.
it MAY be returned in reply to any subsequent request.
The Cache-Control general-header field is used to specify directives
that MUST be obeyed by all caching mechanisms along the
request/response chain. The directives specify behavior intended to
prevent caches from adversely interfering with the request or
response. These directives typically override the default caching
algorithms. Cache directives are unidirectional in that the presence
of a directive in a request does not imply that the same directive is
to be given in the response.
Note that HTTP/1.0 caches might not implement Cache-Control and
might only implement Pragma: no-cache (see section 14.32).
Cache directives MUST be passed through by a proxy or gateway
application, regardless of their significance to that application,
since the directives might be applicable to all recipients along the
request/response chain. It is not possible to specify a cache-
directive for a specific cache.
Cache-Control   = "Cache-Control" ":" 1#cache-directive
cache-directive = cache-request-directive
| cache-response-directive
cache-request-directive =
cache-response-directive =
cache-extension = token [ "=" ( token | quoted-string ) ]
When a directive appears without any 1#field-name parameter, the
directive applies to the entire request or response. When such a
directive appears with a 1#field-name parameter, it applies only to
the named field or fields, and not to the rest of the request or
response. This mechanism supports extensibility; implementations of
future versions of the HTTP protocol might apply these directives to
header fields not defined in HTTP/1.1.
The cache-control directives can be broken down into these general
- Restrictions on what are cacheable; these may only be imposed by
- Restrictions on what may be stored by a cache; these may be
imposed by either the origin server or the user agent.
- Modifications of the basic expiration mechanism; these may be
- Controls over cache revalidation and reload; these may only be
- Control over transformation of entities.
- Extensions to the caching system.
By default, a response is cacheable if the requirements of the
request method, request header fields, and the response status
indicate that it is cacheable. Section 13.4 summarizes these defaults
for cacheability. The following Cache-Control response directives
allow an origin server to override the default cacheability of a
Indicates that the response MAY be cached by any cache, even if it
would normally be non-cacheable or cacheable only within a non-
shared cache. (See also Authorization, section 14.8, for
Indicates that all or part of the response message is intended for
a single user and MUST NOT be cached by a shared cache. This
allows an origin server to state that the specified parts of the
response are intended for only one user and are not a valid
response for requests by other users. A private (non-shared) cache
Note: This usage of the word private only controls where the
response may be cached, and cannot ensure the privacy of the
If the no-cache directive does not specify a field-name, then a
cache MUST NOT use the response to satisfy a subsequent request
without successful revalidation with the origin server. This
allows an origin server to prevent caching even by caches that
have been configured to return stale responses to client requests.
If the no-cache directive does specify one or more field-names,
then a cache MAY use the response to satisfy a subsequent request,
subject to any other restrictions on caching. However, the
specified field-name(s) MUST NOT be sent in the response to a
subsequent request without successful revalidation with the origin
server. This allows an origin server to prevent the re-use of
certain header fields in a response, while still allowing caching
of the rest of the response.
Note: Most HTTP/1.0 caches will not recognize or obey this
The purpose of the no-store directive is to prevent the
inadvertent release or retention of sensitive information (for
example, on backup tapes). The no-store directive applies to the
entire message, and MAY be sent either in a response or in a
request. If sent in a request, a cache MUST NOT store any part of
either this request or any response to it. If sent in a response,
a cache MUST NOT store any part of either this response or the
request that elicited it. This directive applies to both non-
shared and shared caches. "MUST NOT store" in this context means
that the cache MUST NOT intentionally store the information in
non-volatile storage, and MUST make a best-effort attempt to
remove the information from volatile storage as promptly as
possible after forwarding it.
Even when this directive is associated with a response, users
might explicitly store such a response outside of the caching
system (e.g., with a "Save As" dialog). History buffers MAY store
such responses as part of their normal operation.
The purpose of this directive is to meet the stated requirements
of certain users and service authors who are concerned about
accidental releases of information via unanticipated accesses to
cache data structures. While the use of this directive might
improve privacy in some cases, we caution that it is NOT in any
way a reliable or sufficient mechanism for ensuring privacy. In
particular, malicious or compromised caches might not recognize or
obey this directive, and communications networks might be
vulnerable to eavesdropping.
The expiration time of an entity MAY be specified by the origin
server using the Expires header (see section 14.21). Alternatively,
it MAY be specified using the max-age directive in a response. When
the max-age cache-control directive is present in a cached response,
the response is stale if its current age is greater than the age
value given (in seconds) at the time of a new request for that
resource. The max-age directive on a response implies that the
response is cacheable (i.e., "public") unless some other, more
restrictive cache directive is also present.
If a response includes both an Expires header and a max-age
directive, the max-age directive overrides the Expires header, even
if the Expires header is more restrictive. This rule allows an origin
server to provide, for a given response, a longer expiration time to
an HTTP/1.1 (or later) cache than to an HTTP/1.0 cache. This might be
useful if certain HTTP/1.0 caches improperly calculate ages or
expiration times, perhaps due to desynchronized clocks.
Many HTTP/1.0 cache implementations will treat an Expires value that
is less than or equal to the response Date value as being equivalent
to the Cache-Control response directive "no-cache". If an HTTP/1.1
cache receives such a response, and the response does not include a
Cache-Control header field, it SHOULD consider the response to be
non-cacheable in order to retain compatibility with HTTP/1.0 servers.
Note: An origin server might wish to use a relatively new HTTP
cache control feature, such as the "private" directive, on a
network including older caches that do not understand that
feature. The origin server will need to combine the new feature
with an Expires field whose value is less than or equal to the
Date value. This will prevent older caches from improperly
If a response includes an s-maxage directive, then for a shared
cache (but not for a private cache), the maximum age specified by
this directive overrides the maximum age specified by either the
max-age directive or the Expires header. The s-maxage directive
also implies the semantics of the proxy-revalidate directive (see
section 14.9.4), i.e., that the shared cache must not use the
entry after it becomes stale to respond to a subsequent request
without first revalidating it with the origin server. The s-
maxage directive is always ignored by a private cache.
Note that most older caches, not compliant with this specification,
do not implement any cache-control directives. An origin server
wishing to use a cache-control directive that restricts, but does not
prevent, caching by an HTTP/1.1-compliant cache MAY exploit the
requirement that the max-age directive overrides the Expires header,
and the fact that pre-HTTP/1.1-compliant caches do not observe the
Other directives allow a user agent to modify the basic expiration
mechanism. These directives MAY be specified on a request:
Indicates that the client is willing to accept a response whose
age is no greater than the specified time in seconds. Unless max-
stale directive is also included, the client is not willing to
accept a stale response.
freshness lifetime is no less than its current age plus the
specified time in seconds. That is, the client wants a response
that will still be fresh for at least the specified number of
Indicates that the client is willing to accept a response that has
exceeded its expiration time. If max-stale is assigned a value,
then the client is willing to accept a response that has exceeded
its expiration time by no more than the specified number of
seconds. If no value is assigned to max-stale, then the client is
willing to accept a stale response of any age.
If a cache returns a stale response, either because of a max-stale
directive on a request, or because the cache is configured to
override the expiration time of a response, the cache MUST attach a
Warning header to the stale response, using Warning 110 (Response is
A cache MAY be configured to return stale responses without
validation, but only if this does not conflict with any "MUST"-level
requirements concerning cache validation (e.g., a "must-revalidate"
cache-control directive).
If both the new request and the cached entry include "max-age"
directives, then the lesser of the two values is used for determining
the freshness of the cached entry for that request.
Sometimes a user agent might want or need to insist that a cache
revalidate its cache entry with the origin server (and not just with
the next cache along the path to the origin server), or to reload its
cache entry from the origin server. End-to-end revalidation might be
necessary if either the cache or the origin server has overestimated
the expiration time of the cached response. End-to-end reload may be
necessary if the cache entry has become corrupted for some reason.
End-to-end revalidation may be requested either when the client does
not have its own local cached copy, in which case we call it
"unspecified end-to-end revalidation", or when the client does have a
local cached copy, in which case we call it "specific end-to-end
The client can specify these three kinds of action using Cache-
Control request directives:
The request includes a "no-cache" cache-control directive or, for
compatibility with HTTP/1.0 clients, "Pragma: no-cache". Field
names MUST NOT be included with the no-cache directive in a
request. The server MUST NOT use a cached copy when responding to
Specific end-to-end revalidation
The request includes a "max-age=0" cache-control directive, which
forces each cache along the path to the origin server to
revalidate its own entry, if any, with the next cache or server.
The initial request includes a cache-validating conditional with
the client's current validator.
Unspecified end-to-end revalidation
The request includes "max-age=0" cache-control directive, which
The initial request does not include a cache-validating
conditional; the first cache along the path (if any) that holds a
cache entry for this resource includes a cache-validating
conditional with its current validator.
When an intermediate cache is forced, by means of a max-age=0
directive, to revalidate its own cache entry, and the client has
supplied its own validator in the request, the supplied validator
might differ from the validator currently stored with the cache
entry. In this case, the cache MAY use either validator in making
its own request without affecting semantic transparency.
However, the choice of validator might affect performance. The
best approach is for the intermediate cache to use its own
validator when making its request. If the server replies with 304
(Not Modified), then the cache can return its now validated copy
to the client with a 200 (OK) response. If the server replies with
a new entity and cache validator, however, the intermediate cache
can compare the returned validator with the one provided in the
client's request, using the strong comparison function. If the
client's validator is equal to the origin server's, then the
intermediate cache simply returns 304 (Not Modified). Otherwise,
it returns the new entity with a 200 (OK) response.
If a request includes the no-cache directive, it SHOULD NOT
include min-fresh, max-stale, or max-age.
In some cases, such as times of extremely poor network
connectivity, a client may want a cache to return only those
responses that it currently has stored, and not to reload or
revalidate with the origin server. To do this, the client may
include the only-if-cached directive in a request. If it receives
this directive, a cache SHOULD either respond using a cached entry
that is consistent with the other constraints of the request, or
respond with a 504 (Gateway Timeout) status. However, if a group
of caches is being operated as a unified system with good internal
connectivity, such a request MAY be forwarded within that group of
Because a cache MAY be configured to ignore a server's specified
expiration time, and because a client request MAY include a max-
stale directive (which has a similar effect), the protocol also
includes a mechanism for the origin server to require revalidation
of a cache entry on any subsequent use. When the must-revalidate
directive is present in a response received by a cache, that cache
MUST NOT use the entry after it becomes stale to respond to a
subsequent request without first revalidating it with the origin
server. (I.e., the cache MUST do an end-to-end revalidation every
time, if, based solely on the origin server's Expires or max-age
value, the cached response is stale.)
The must-revalidate directive is necessary to support reliable
operation for certain protocol features. In all circumstances an
HTTP/1.1 cache MUST obey the must-revalidate directive; in
particular, if the cache cannot reach the origin server for any
reason, it MUST generate a 504 (Gateway Timeout) response.
Servers SHOULD send the must-revalidate directive if and only if
failure to revalidate a request on the entity could result in
incorrect operation, such as a silently unexecuted financial
transaction. Recipients MUST NOT take any automated action that
violates this directive, and MUST NOT automatically provide an
unvalidated copy of the entity if revalidation fails.
Although this is not recommended, user agents operating under
severe connectivity constraints MAY violate this directive but, if
so, MUST explicitly warn the user that an unvalidated response has
been provided. The warning MUST be provided on each unvalidated
access, and SHOULD require explicit user confirmation.
The proxy-revalidate directive has the same meaning as the must-
revalidate directive, except that it does not apply to non-shared
user agent caches. It can be used on a response to an
authenticated request to permit the user's cache to store and
later return the response without needing to revalidate it (since
it has already been authenticated once by that user), while still
requiring proxies that service many users to revalidate each time
(in order to make sure that each user has been authenticated).
Note that such authenticated responses also need the public cache
control directive in order to allow them to be cached at all.
Implementors of intermediate caches (proxies) have found it useful
to convert the media type of certain entity bodies. A non-
transparent proxy might, for example, convert between image
formats in order to save cache space or to reduce the amount of
Serious operational problems occur, however, when these
transformations are applied to entity bodies intended for certain
kinds of applications. For example, applications for medical
imaging, scientific data analysis and those using end-to-end
authentication, all depend on receiving an entity body that is bit
for bit identical to the original entity-body.
Therefore, if a message includes the no-transform directive, an
intermediate cache or proxy MUST NOT change those headers that are
listed in section 13.5.2 as being subject to the no-transform
directive. This implies that the cache or proxy MUST NOT change
any aspect of the entity-body that is specified by these headers,
including the value of the entity-body itself.
The Cache-Control header field can be extended through the use of one
or more cache-extension tokens, each with an optional assigned value.
Informational extensions (those which do not require a change in
cache behavior) MAY be added without changing the semantics of other
directives. Behavioral extensions are designed to work by acting as
modifiers to the existing base of cache directives. Both the new
directive and the standard directive are supplied, such that
applications which do not understand the new directive will default
to the behavior specified by the standard directive, and those that
understand the new directive will recognize it as modifying the
requirements associated with the standard directive. In this way,
extensions to the cache-control directives can be made without
requiring changes to the base protocol.
This extension mechanism depends on an HTTP cache obeying all of the
cache-control directives defined for its native HTTP-version, obeying
certain extensions, and ignoring all directives that it does not
For example, consider a hypothetical new response directive called
community which acts as a modifier to the private directive. We
define this new directive to mean that, in addition to any non-shared
cache, any cache which is shared only by members of the community
named within its value may cache the response. An origin server
wishing to allow the UCI community to use an otherwise private
response in their shared cache(s) could do so by including
Cache-Control: private, community="UCI"
A cache seeing this header field will act correctly even if the cache
does not understand the community cache-extension, since it will also
see and understand the private directive and thus default to the safe
Unrecognized cache-directives MUST be ignored; it is assumed that any
cache-directive likely to be unrecognized by an HTTP/1.1 cache will
be combined with standard directives (or the response's default
cacheability) such that the cache behavior will remain minimally
correct even if the cache does not understand the extension(s).
The Connection general-header field allows the sender to specify
options that are desired for that particular connection and MUST NOT
be communicated by proxies over further connections.
The Connection header has the following grammar:
Connection = "Connection" ":" 1#(connection-token)
connection-token  = token
HTTP/1.1 proxies MUST parse the Connection header field before a
message is forwarded and, for each connection-token in this field,
remove any header field(s) from the message with the same name as the
connection-token. Connection options are signaled by the presence of
a connection-token in the Connection header field, not by any
corresponding additional header field(s), since the additional header
field may not be sent if there are no parameters associated with that
Message headers listed in the Connection header MUST NOT include
end-to-end headers, such as Cache-Control.
HTTP/1.1 defines the "close" connection option for the sender to
signal that the connection will be closed after completion of the
in either the request or the response header fields indicates that
the connection SHOULD NOT be considered `persistent' (section 8.1)
after the current request/response is complete.
HTTP/1.1 applications that do not support persistent connections MUST
include the "close" connection option in every message.
A system receiving an HTTP/1.0 (or lower-version) message that
includes a Connection header MUST, for each connection-token in this
field, remove and ignore any header field(s) from the message with
the same name as the connection-token. This protects against mistaken
forwarding of such header fields by pre-HTTP/1.1 proxies. See section
The Content-Encoding entity-header field is used as a modifier to the
media-type. When present, its value indicates what additional content
codings have been applied to the entity-body, and thus what decoding
mechanisms must be applied in order to obtain the media-type
referenced by the Content-Type header field. Content-Encoding is
primarily used to allow a document to be compressed without losing
the identity of its underlying media type.
Content-Encoding  = "Content-Encoding" ":" 1#content-coding
Content codings are defined in section 3.5. An example of its use is
The content-coding is a characteristic of the entity identified by
the Request-URI. Typically, the entity-body is stored with this
encoding and is only decoded before rendering or analogous usage.
However, a non-transparent proxy MAY modify the content-coding if the
new coding is known to be acceptable to the recipient, unless the
"no-transform" cache-control directive is present in the message.
If the content-coding of an entity is not "identity", then the
response MUST include a Content-Encoding entity-header (section
14.11) that lists the non-identity content-coding(s) used.
If the content-coding of an entity in a request message is not
acceptable to the origin server, the server SHOULD respond with a
status code of 415 (Unsupported Media Type).
If multiple encodings have been applied to an entity, the content
codings MUST be listed in the order in which they were applied.
Additional information about the encoding parameters MAY be provided
by other entity-header fields not defined by this specification.
The Content-Language entity-header field describes the natural
language(s) of the intended audience for the enclosed entity. Note
that this might not be equivalent to all the languages used within
Content-Language  = "Content-Language" ":" 1#language-tag
Language tags are defined in section 3.10. The primary purpose of
Content-Language is to allow a user to identify and differentiate
entities according to the user's own preferred language. Thus, if the
body content is intended only for a Danish-literate audience, the
If no Content-Language is specified, the default is that the content
is intended for all language audiences. This might mean that the
sender does not consider it to be specific to any natural language,
or that the sender does not know for which language it is intended.
Multiple languages MAY be listed for content that is intended for
multiple audiences. For example, a rendition of the "Treaty of
Waitangi," presented simultaneously in the original Maori and English
versions, would call for
However, just because multiple languages are present within an entity
does not mean that it is intended for multiple linguistic audiences.
An example would be a beginner's language primer, such as "A First
Lesson in Latin," which is clearly intended to be used by an
English-literate audience. In this case, the Content-Language would
properly only include "en".
Content-Language MAY be applied to any media type -- it is not
limited to textual documents.
The Content-Length entity-header field indicates the size of the
entity-body, in decimal number of OCTETs, sent to the recipient or,
in the case of the HEAD method, the size of the entity-body that
would have been sent had the request been a GET.
Content-Length    = "Content-Length" ":" 1*DIGIT
Applications SHOULD use this field to indicate the transfer-length of
the message-body, unless this is prohibited by the rules in section
Any Content-Length greater than or equal to zero is a valid value.
Section 4.4 describes how to determine the length of a message-body
if a Content-Length is not given.
Note that the meaning of this field is significantly different from
the corresponding definition in MIME, where it is an optional field
used within the "message/external-body" content-type. In HTTP, it
SHOULD be sent whenever the message's length can be determined prior
to being transferred, unless this is prohibited by the rules in
The Content-Location entity-header field MAY be used to supply the
resource location for the entity enclosed in the message when that
entity is accessible from a location separate from the requested
resource's URI. A server SHOULD provide a Content-Location for the
variant corresponding to the response entity; especially in the case
where a resource has multiple entities associated with it, and those
entities actually have separate locations by which they might be
individually accessed, the server SHOULD provide a Content-Location
for the particular variant which is returned.
Content-Location = "Content-Location" ":"
The value of Content-Location also defines the base URI for the
The Content-Location value is not a replacement for the original
requested URI; it is only a statement of the location of the resource
corresponding to this particular entity at the time of the request.
Future requests MAY specify the Content-Location URI as the request-
URI if the desire is to identify the source of that particular
A cache cannot assume that an entity with a Content-Location
different from the URI used to retrieve it can be used to respond to
later requests on that Content-Location URI. However, the Content-
Location can be used to differentiate between multiple entities
retrieved from a single requested resource, as described in section
If the Content-Location is a relative URI, the relative URI is
interpreted relative to the Request-URI.
The meaning of the Content-Location header in PUT or POST requests is
undefined; servers are free to ignore it in those cases.
The Content-MD5 entity-header field, as defined in RFC 1864 [23], is
an MD5 digest of the entity-body for the purpose of providing an
end-to-end message integrity check (MIC) of the entity-body. (Note: a
MIC is good for detecting accidental modification of the entity-body
in transit, but is not proof against malicious attacks.)
The Content-MD5 header field MAY be generated by an origin server or
client to function as an integrity check of the entity-body. Only
origin servers or clients MAY generate the Content-MD5 header field;
proxies and gateways MUST NOT generate it, as this would defeat its
value as an end-to-end integrity check. Any recipient of the entity-
body, including gateways and proxies, MAY check that the digest value
in this header field matches that of the entity-body as received.
The MD5 digest is computed based on the content of the entity-body,
including any content-coding that has been applied, but not including
any transfer-encoding applied to the message-body. If the message is
received with a transfer-encoding, that encoding MUST be removed
prior to checking the Content-MD5 value against the received entity.
This has the result that the digest is computed on the octets of the
entity-body exactly as, and in the order that, they would be sent if
no transfer-encoding were being applied.
HTTP extends RFC 1864 to permit the digest to be computed for MIME
composite media-types (e.g., multipart/* and message/rfc822), but
this does not change how the digest is computed as defined in the
There are several consequences of this. The entity-body for composite
types MAY contain many body-parts, each with its own MIME and HTTP
headers (including Content-MD5, Content-Transfer-Encoding, and
Content-Encoding headers). If a body-part has a Content-Transfer-
Encoding or Content-Encoding header, it is assumed that the content
of the body-part has had the encoding applied, and the body-part is
included in the Content-MD5 digest as is -- i.e., after the
application. The Transfer-Encoding header field is not allowed within
Conversion of all line breaks to CRLF MUST NOT be done before
computing or checking the digest: the line break convention used in
the text actually transmitted MUST be left unaltered when computing
Note: while the definition of Content-MD5 is exactly the same for
HTTP as in RFC 1864 for MIME entity-bodies, there are several ways
in which the application of Content-MD5 to HTTP entity-bodies
differs from its application to MIME entity-bodies. One is that
HTTP, unlike MIME, does not use Content-Transfer-Encoding, and
does use Transfer-Encoding and Content-Encoding. Another is that
HTTP more frequently uses binary content types than MIME, so it is
worth noting that, in such cases, the byte order used to compute
the digest is the transmission byte order defined for the type.
Lastly, HTTP allows transmission of text types with any of several
line break conventions and not just the canonical form using CRLF.
The Content-Range entity-header is sent with a partial entity-body to
specify where in the full entity-body the partial body should be
applied. Range units are defined in section 3.12.
Content-Range = "Content-Range" ":" content-range-spec
content-range-spec      = byte-content-range-spec
byte-content-range-spec = bytes-unit SP
byte-range-resp-spec = (first-byte-pos "-" last-byte-pos)
The header SHOULD indicate the total length of the full entity-body,
unless this length is unknown or difficult to determine. The asterisk
"*" character means that the instance-length is unknown at the time
when the response was generated.
Unlike byte-ranges-specifier values (see section 14.35.1), a byte-
range-resp-spec MUST only specify one range, and MUST contain
absolute byte positions for both the first and last byte of the
A byte-content-range-spec with a byte-range-resp-spec whose last-
byte-pos value is less than its first-byte-pos value, or whose
instance-length value is less than or equal to its last-byte-pos
value, is invalid. The recipient of an invalid byte-content-range-
spec MUST ignore it and any content transferred along with it.
A server sending a response with status code 416 (Requested range not
satisfiable) SHOULD include a Content-Range field with a byte-range-
resp-spec of "*". The instance-length specifies the current length of
the selected resource. A response with status code 206 (Partial
Content) MUST NOT include a Content-Range field with a byte-range-
Examples of byte-content-range-spec values, assuming that the entity
contains a total of 1234 bytes:
. All except for the first 500 bytes:
When an HTTP message includes the content of a single range (for
example, a response to a request for a single range, or to a request
for a set of ranges that overlap without any holes), this content is
transmitted with a Content-Range header, and a Content-Length header
showing the number of bytes actually transferred. For example,
When an HTTP message includes the content of multiple ranges (for
example, a response to a request for multiple non-overlapping
ranges), these are transmitted as a multipart message. The multipart
media type used for this purpose is "multipart/byteranges" as defined
in appendix 19.2. See appendix 19.6.3 for a compatibility issue.
A response to a request for a single range MUST NOT be sent using the
multipart/byteranges media type.  A response to a request for
multiple ranges, whose result is a single range, MAY be sent as a
multipart/byteranges media type with one part. A client that cannot
decode a multipart/byteranges message MUST NOT ask for multiple
byte-ranges in a single request.
When a client requests multiple byte-ranges in one request, the
server SHOULD return them in the order that they appeared in the
If the server ignores a byte-range-spec because it is syntactically
invalid, the server SHOULD treat the request as if the invalid Range
header field did not exist. (Normally, this means return a 200
response containing the full entity).
If the server receives a request (other than one including an If-
Range request-header field) with an unsatisfiable Range request-
header field (that is, all of whose byte-range-spec values have a
first-byte-pos value greater than the current length of the selected
resource), it SHOULD return a response code of 416 (Requested range
not satisfiable) (section 10.4.17).
Note: clients cannot depend on servers to send a 416 (Requested
range not satisfiable) response instead of a 200 (OK) response for
an unsatisfiable Range request-header, since not all servers
implement this request-header.
The Content-Type entity-header field indicates the media type of the
entity-body sent to the recipient or, in the case of the HEAD method,
the media type that would have been sent had the request been a GET.
Content-Type   = "Content-Type" ":" media-type
Media types are defined in section 3.7. An example of the field is
Content-Type: text/html; charset=ISO-8859-4
Further discussion of methods for identifying the media type of an
entity is provided in section 7.2.1.
The Date general-header field represents the date and time at which
the message was originated, having the same semantics as orig-date in
RFC 822. The field value is an HTTP-date, as described in section
Origin servers MUST include a Date header field in all responses,
Protocols), the response MAY include a Date header field, at
(Internal Server Error) or 503 (Service Unavailable), and it is
inconvenient or impossible to generate a valid Date.
reasonable approximation of the current time, its responses
MUST NOT include a Date header field. In this case, the rules
A received message that does not have a Date header field MUST be
assigned one by the recipient if the message will be cached by that
recipient or gatewayed via a protocol which requires a Date. An HTTP
implementation without a clock MUST NOT cache responses without
revalidating them on every use. An HTTP cache, especially a shared
cache, SHOULD use a mechanism, such as NTP [28], to synchronize its
clock with a reliable external standard.
Clients SHOULD only send a Date header field in messages that include
an entity-body, as in the case of the PUT and POST requests, and even
then it is optional. A client without a clock MUST NOT send a Date
header field in a request.
The HTTP-date sent in a Date header SHOULD NOT represent a date and
time subsequent to the generation of the message. It SHOULD represent
the best available approximation of the date and time of message
generation, unless the implementation has no means of generating a
reasonably accurate date and time. In theory, the date ought to
represent the moment just before the entity is generated. In
practice, the date can be generated at any time during the message
origination without affecting its semantic value.
Some origin server implementations might not have a clock available.
An origin server without a clock MUST NOT assign Expires or Last-
Modified values to a response, unless these values were associated
with the resource by a system or user with a reliable clock. It MAY
assign an Expires value that is known, at or before server
configuration time, to be in the past (this allows "pre-expiration"
of responses without storing separate Expires values for each
The ETag response-header field provides the current value of the
entity tag for the requested variant. The headers used with entity
tags are described in sections 14.24, 14.26 and 14.44. The entity tag
MAY be used for comparison with other entities from the same resource
The Expect request-header field is used to indicate that particular
server behaviors are required by the client.
expectation  =  "100-continue" | expectation-extension
expectation-extension =  token [ "=" ( token | quoted-string )
A server that does not understand or is unable to comply with any of
the expectation values in the Expect field of a request MUST respond
with appropriate error status. The server MUST respond with a 417
(Expectation Failed) status if any of the expectations cannot be met
or, if there are other problems with the request, some other 4xx
This header field is defined with extensible syntax to allow for
future extensions. If a server receives a request containing an
Expect field that includes an expectation-extension that it does not
support, it MUST respond with a 417 (Expectation Failed) status.
Comparison of expectation values is case-insensitive for unquoted
tokens (including the 100-continue token), and is case-sensitive for
quoted-string expectation-extensions.
The Expect mechanism is hop-by-hop: that is, an HTTP/1.1 proxy MUST
return a 417 (Expectation Failed) status if it receives a request
with an expectation that it cannot meet. However, the Expect
request-header itself is end-to-end; it MUST be forwarded if the
Many older HTTP/1.0 and HTTP/1.1 applications do not understand the
See section 8.2.3 for the use of the 100 (continue) status.
The Expires entity-header field gives the date/time after which the
response is considered stale. A stale cache entry may not normally be
returned by a cache (either a proxy cache or a user agent cache)
unless it is first validated with the origin server (or with an
intermediate cache that has a fresh copy of the entity). See section
The presence of an Expires field does not imply that the original
resource will change or cease to exist at, before, or after that
The format is an absolute date and time as defined by HTTP-date in
section 3.3.1; it MUST be in RFC 1123 date format:
Expires = "Expires" ":" HTTP-date
Note: if a response includes a Cache-Control field with the max-
age directive (see section 14.9.3), that directive overrides the
HTTP/1.1 clients and caches MUST treat other invalid date formats,
especially including the value "0", as in the past (i.e., "already
To mark a response as "already expired," an origin server sends an
Expires date that is equal to the Date header value. (See the rules
for expiration calculations in section 13.2.4.)
To mark a response as "never expires," an origin server sends an
Expires date approximately one year from the time the response is
sent. HTTP/1.1 servers SHOULD NOT send Expires dates more than one
The presence of an Expires header field with a date value of some
time in the future on a response that otherwise would by default be
non-cacheable indicates that the response is cacheable, unless
indicated otherwise by a Cache-Control header field (section 14.9).
The From request-header field, if given, SHOULD contain an Internet
e-mail address for the human user who controls the requesting user
agent. The address SHOULD be machine-usable, as defined by "mailbox"
This header field MAY be used for logging purposes and as a means for
identifying the source of invalid or unwanted requests. It SHOULD NOT
be used as an insecure form of access protection. The interpretation
of this field is that the request is being performed on behalf of the
person given, who accepts responsibility for the method performed. In
particular, robot agents SHOULD include this header so that the
person responsible for running the robot can be contacted if problems
occur on the receiving end.
The Internet e-mail address in this field MAY be separate from the
Internet host which issued the request. For example, when a request
is passed through a proxy the original issuer's address SHOULD be
The client SHOULD NOT send the From header field without the user's
approval, as it might conflict with the user's privacy interests or
their site's security policy. It is strongly recommended that the
user be able to disable, enable, and modify the value of this field
at any time prior to a request.
The Host request-header field specifies the Internet host and port
number of the resource being requested, as obtained from the original
URI given by the user or referring resource (generally an HTTP URL,
as described in section 3.2.2). The Host field value MUST represent
the naming authority of the origin server or gateway given by the
original URL. This allows the origin server or gateway to
differentiate between internally-ambiguous URLs, such as the root "/"
URL of a server for multiple host names on a single IP address.
A "host" without any trailing port information implies the default
port for the service requested (e.g., "80" for an HTTP URL). For
example, a request on the origin server for
<http://www.w3.org/pub/WWW/> would properly include:
A client MUST include a Host header field in all HTTP/1.1 request
messages . If the requested URI does not include an Internet host
name for the service being requested, then the Host header field MUST
be given with an empty value. An HTTP/1.1 proxy MUST ensure that any
request message it forwards does contain an appropriate Host header
field that identifies the service being requested by the proxy. All
Internet-based HTTP/1.1 servers MUST respond with a 400 (Bad Request)
status code to any HTTP/1.1 request message which lacks a Host header
See sections 5.2 and 19.6.1.1 for other requirements relating to
The If-Match request-header field is used with a method to make it
conditional. A client that has one or more entities previously
obtained from the resource can verify that one of those entities is
current by including a list of their associated entity tags in the
If-Match header field. Entity tags are defined in section 3.11. The
purpose of this feature is to allow efficient updates of cached
information with a minimum amount of transaction overhead. It is also
used, on updating requests, to prevent inadvertent modification of
the wrong version of a resource. As a special case, the value "*"
matches any current entity of the resource.
If any of the entity tags match the entity tag of the entity that
would have been returned in the response to a similar GET request
(without the If-Match header) on that resource, or if "*" is given
and any current entity exists for that resource, then the server MAY
perform the requested method as if the If-Match header field did not
A server MUST use the strong comparison function (see section 13.3.3)
to compare the entity tags in If-Match.
If none of the entity tags match, or if "*" is given and no current
entity exists, the server MUST NOT perform the requested method, and
MUST return a 412 (Precondition Failed) response. This behavior is
most useful when the client wants to prevent an updating method, such
as PUT, from modifying a resource that has changed since the client
If the request would, without the If-Match header field, result in
anything other than a 2xx or 412 status, then the If-Match header
The meaning of "If-Match: *" is that the method SHOULD be performed
if the representation selected by the origin server (or by a cache,
possibly using the Vary mechanism, see section 14.44) exists, and
MUST NOT be performed if the representation does not exist.
A request intended to update a resource (e.g., a PUT) MAY include an
If-Match header field to signal that the request method MUST NOT be
applied if the entity corresponding to the If-Match value (a single
entity tag) is no longer a representation of that resource. This
allows the user to indicate that they do not wish the request to be
successful if the resource has been changed without their knowledge.
The result of a request having both an If-Match header field and
either an If-None-Match or an If-Modified-Since header fields is
undefined by this specification.
The If-Modified-Since request-header field is used with a method to
make it conditional: if the requested variant has not been modified
since the time specified in this field, an entity will not be
returned from the server; instead, a 304 (not modified) response will
be returned without any message-body.
If-Modified-Since = "If-Modified-Since" ":" HTTP-date
An example of the field is:
A GET method with an If-Modified-Since header and no Range header
requests that the identified entity be transferred only if it has
been modified since the date given by the If-Modified-Since header.
The algorithm for determining this includes the following cases:
a) If the request would normally result in anything other than a
invalid, the response is exactly the same as for a normal GET.
A date which is later than the server's current time is
b) If the variant has been modified since the If-Modified-Since
date, the response is exactly the same as for a normal GET.
c) If the variant has not been modified since a valid If-
Modified-Since date, the server SHOULD return a 304 (Not
The purpose of this feature is to allow efficient updates of cached
information with a minimum amount of transaction overhead.
Note: The Range request-header field modifies the meaning of If-
Modified-Since; see section 14.35 for full details.
Note: If-Modified-Since times are interpreted by the server, whose
clock might not be synchronized with the client.
Note: When handling an If-Modified-Since header field, some
servers will use an exact date comparison function, rather than a
less-than function, for deciding whether to send a 304 (Not
Modified) response. To get best results when sending an If-
Modified-Since header field for cache validation, clients are
advised to use the exact date string received in a previous Last-
Modified header field whenever possible.
Note: If a client uses an arbitrary date in the If-Modified-Since
header instead of a date taken from the Last-Modified header for
the same request, the client should be aware of the fact that this
date is interpreted in the server's understanding of time. The
client should consider unsynchronized clocks and rounding problems
due to the different encodings of time between the client and
server. This includes the possibility of race conditions if the
document has changed between the time it was first requested and
the If-Modified-Since date of a subsequent request, and the
possibility of clock-skew-related problems if the If-Modified-
Since date is derived from the client's clock without correction
to the server's clock. Corrections for different time bases
between client and server are at best approximate due to network
The result of a request having both an If-Modified-Since header field
and either an If-Match or an If-Unmodified-Since header fields is
The If-None-Match request-header field is used with a method to make
it conditional. A client that has one or more entities previously
obtained from the resource can verify that none of those entities is
If-None-Match header field. The purpose of this feature is to allow
efficient updates of cached information with a minimum amount of
transaction overhead. It is also used to prevent a method (e.g. PUT)
from inadvertently modifying an existing resource when the client
believes that the resource does not exist.
As a special case, the value "*" matches any current entity of the
(without the If-None-Match header) on that resource, or if "*" is
given and any current entity exists for that resource, then the
server MUST NOT perform the requested method, unless required to do
so because the resource's modification date fails to match that
supplied in an If-Modified-Since header field in the request.
Instead, if the request method was GET or HEAD, the server SHOULD
respond with a 304 (Not Modified) response, including the cache-
related header fields (particularly ETag) of one of the entities that
matched. For all other request methods, the server MUST respond with
a status of 412 (Precondition Failed).
See section 13.3.3 for rules on how to determine if two entities tags
match. The weak comparison function can only be used with GET or HEAD
If none of the entity tags match, then the server MAY perform the
requested method as if the If-None-Match header field did not exist,
but MUST also ignore any If-Modified-Since header field(s) in the
request. That is, if no entity tags match, then the server MUST NOT
return a 304 (Not Modified) response.
If the request would, without the If-None-Match header field, result
in anything other than a 2xx or 304 status, then the If-None-Match
header MUST be ignored. (See section 13.3.4 for a discussion of
server behavior when both If-Modified-Since and If-None-Match appear
The meaning of "If-None-Match: *" is that the method MUST NOT be
performed if the representation selected by the origin server (or by
a cache, possibly using the Vary mechanism, see section 14.44)
exists, and SHOULD be performed if the representation does not exist.
This feature is intended to be useful in preventing races between PUT
If-None-Match: "xyzzy", "r2d2xxxx", "c3piozzzz"
The result of a request having both an If-None-Match header field and
either an If-Match or an If-Unmodified-Since header fields is
If a client has a partial copy of an entity in its cache, and wishes
to have an up-to-date copy of the entire entity in its cache, it
could use the Range request-header with a conditional GET (using
either or both of If-Unmodified-Since and If-Match.) However, if the
condition fails because the entity has been modified, the client
would then have to make a second request to obtain the entire current
The If-Range header allows a client to "short-circuit" the second
request. Informally, its meaning is `if the entity is unchanged, send
me the part(s) that I am missing; otherwise, send me the entire new
If the client has no entity tag for an entity, but does have a Last-
Modified date, it MAY use that date in an If-Range header. (The
server can distinguish between a valid HTTP-date and any form of
entity-tag by examining no more than two characters.) The If-Range
header SHOULD only be used together with a Range header, and MUST be
ignored if the request does not include a Range header, or if the
server does not support the sub-range operation.
If the entity tag given in the If-Range header matches the current
entity tag for the entity, then the server SHOULD provide the
specified sub-range of the entity using a 206 (Partial content)
response. If the entity tag does not match, then the server SHOULD
return the entire entity using a 200 (OK) response.
The If-Unmodified-Since request-header field is used with a method to
make it conditional. If the requested resource has not been modified
since the time specified in this field, the server SHOULD perform the
requested operation as if the If-Unmodified-Since header were not
If the requested variant has been modified since the specified time,
the server MUST NOT perform the requested operation, and MUST return
If-Unmodified-Since = "If-Unmodified-Since" ":" HTTP-date
If the request normally (i.e., without the If-Unmodified-Since
header) would result in anything other than a 2xx or 412 status, the
If-Unmodified-Since header SHOULD be ignored.
If the specified date is invalid, the header is ignored.
The result of a request having both an If-Unmodified-Since header
field and either an If-None-Match or an If-Modified-Since header
fields is undefined by this specification.
The Last-Modified entity-header field indicates the date and time at
which the origin server believes the variant was last modified.
Last-Modified  = "Last-Modified" ":" HTTP-date
The exact meaning of this header field depends on the implementation
of the origin server and the nature of the original resource. For
files, it may be just the file system last-modified time. For
entities with dynamically included parts, it may be the most recent
of the set of last-modify times for its component parts. For database
gateways, it may be the last-update time stamp of the record. For
virtual objects, it may be the last time the internal state changed.
An origin server MUST NOT send a Last-Modified date which is later
than the server's time of message origination. In such cases, where
the resource's last modification would indicate some time in the
future, the server MUST replace that date with the message
An origin server SHOULD obtain the Last-Modified value of the entity
as close as possible to the time that it generates the Date value of
its response. This allows a recipient to make an accurate assessment
of the entity's modification time, especially if the entity changes
near the time that the response is generated.
HTTP/1.1 servers SHOULD send Last-Modified whenever feasible.
The Location response-header field is used to redirect the recipient
to a location other than the Request-URI for completion of the
request or identification of a new resource. For 201 (Created)
responses, the Location is that of the new resource which was created
by the request. For 3xx responses, the location SHOULD indicate the
server's preferred URI for automatic redirection to the resource. The
field value consists of a single absolute URI.
Location: http://www.w3.org/pub/WWW/People.html
Note: The Content-Location header field (section 14.14) differs
from Location in that the Content-Location identifies the original
location of the entity enclosed in the request. It is therefore
possible for a response to contain header fields for both Location
and Content-Location. Also see section 13.10 for cache
requirements of some methods.
The Max-Forwards request-header field provides a mechanism with the
TRACE (section 9.8) and OPTIONS (section 9.2) methods to limit the
number of proxies or gateways that can forward the request to the
next inbound server. This can be useful when the client is attempting
to trace a request chain which appears to be failing or looping in
The Max-Forwards value is a decimal integer indicating the remaining
number of times this request message may be forwarded.
Each proxy or gateway recipient of a TRACE or OPTIONS request
containing a Max-Forwards header field MUST check and update its
value prior to forwarding the request. If the received value is zero
(0), the recipient MUST NOT forward the request; instead, it MUST
respond as the final recipient. If the received Max-Forwards value is
greater than zero, then the forwarded message MUST contain an updated
Max-Forwards field with a value decremented by one (1).
The Max-Forwards header field MAY be ignored for all other methods
defined by this specification and for any extension methods for which
it is not explicitly referred to as part of that method definition.
The Pragma general-header field is used to include implementation-
specific directives that might apply to any recipient along the
request/response chain. All pragma directives specify optional
behavior from the viewpoint of the protocol; however, some systems
MAY require that behavior be consistent with the directives.
pragma-directive  = "no-cache" | extension-pragma
extension-pragma  = token [ "=" ( token | quoted-string ) ]
When the no-cache directive is present in a request message, an
application SHOULD forward the request toward the origin server even
if it has a cached copy of what is being requested. This pragma
directive has the same semantics as the no-cache cache-directive (see
section 14.9) and is defined here for backward compatibility with
HTTP/1.0. Clients SHOULD include both header fields when a no-cache
request is sent to a server not known to be HTTP/1.1 compliant.
Pragma directives MUST be passed through by a proxy or gateway
request/response chain. It is not possible to specify a pragma for a
specific recipient; however, any pragma directive not relevant to a
recipient SHOULD be ignored by that recipient.
HTTP/1.1 caches SHOULD treat "Pragma: no-cache" as if the client had
sent "Cache-Control: no-cache". No new Pragma directives will be
Note: because the meaning of "Pragma: no-cache as a response
header field is not actually specified, it does not provide a
reliable replacement for "Cache-Control: no-cache" in a response
The Proxy-Authenticate response-header field MUST be included as part
of a 407 (Proxy Authentication Required) response. The field value
consists of a challenge that indicates the authentication scheme and
parameters applicable to the proxy for this Request-URI.
Proxy-Authenticate  = "Proxy-Authenticate" ":" 1#challenge
The HTTP access authentication process is described in "HTTP
Authentication: Basic and Digest Access Authentication" [43]. Unlike
WWW-Authenticate, the Proxy-Authenticate header field applies only to
the current connection and SHOULD NOT be passed on to downstream
clients. However, an intermediate proxy might need to obtain its own
credentials by requesting them from the downstream client, which in
some circumstances will appear as if the proxy is forwarding the
Proxy-Authenticate header field.
The Proxy-Authorization request-header field allows the client to
identify itself (or its user) to a proxy which requires
authentication. The Proxy-Authorization field value consists of
credentials containing the authentication information of the user
agent for the proxy and/or realm of the resource being requested.
Proxy-Authorization     = "Proxy-Authorization" ":" credentials
Authentication: Basic and Digest Access Authentication" [43] . Unlike
Authorization, the Proxy-Authorization header field applies only to
the next outbound proxy that demanded authentication using the Proxy-
Authenticate field. When multiple proxies are used in a chain, the
Proxy-Authorization header field is consumed by the first outbound
proxy that was expecting to receive credentials. A proxy MAY relay
the credentials from the client request to the next proxy if that is
the mechanism by which the proxies cooperatively authenticate a given
Since all HTTP entities are represented in HTTP messages as sequences
of bytes, the concept of a byte range is meaningful for any HTTP
entity. (However, not all clients and servers need to support byte-
Byte range specifications in HTTP apply to the sequence of bytes in
the entity-body (not necessarily the same as the message-body).
A byte range operation MAY specify a single range of bytes, or a set
of ranges within a single entity.
ranges-specifier = byte-ranges-specifier
byte-ranges-specifier = bytes-unit "=" byte-range-set
byte-range-set  = 1#( byte-range-spec | suffix-byte-range-spec )
byte-range-spec = first-byte-pos "-" [last-byte-pos]
The first-byte-pos value in a byte-range-spec gives the byte-offset
of the first byte in a range. The last-byte-pos value gives the
byte-offset of the last byte in the range; that is, the byte
positions specified are inclusive. Byte offsets start at zero.
If the last-byte-pos value is present, it MUST be greater than or
equal to the first-byte-pos in that byte-range-spec, or the byte-
range-spec is syntactically invalid. The recipient of a byte-range-
set that includes one or more syntactically invalid byte-range-spec
values MUST ignore the header field that includes that byte-range-
If the last-byte-pos value is absent, or if the value is greater than
or equal to the current length of the entity-body, last-byte-pos is
taken to be equal to one less than the current length of the entity-
By its choice of last-byte-pos, a client can limit the number of
bytes retrieved without knowing the size of the entity.
suffix-byte-range-spec = "-" suffix-length
A suffix-byte-range-spec is used to specify the suffix of the
entity-body, of a length given by the suffix-length value. (That is,
this form specifies the last N bytes of an entity-body.) If the
entity is shorter than the specified suffix-length, the entire
If a syntactically valid byte-range-set includes at least one byte-
range-spec whose first-byte-pos is less than the current length of
the entity-body, or at least one suffix-byte-range-spec with a non-
zero suffix-length, then the byte-range-set is satisfiable.
Otherwise, the byte-range-set is unsatisfiable. If the byte-range-set
is unsatisfiable, the server SHOULD return a response with a status
of 416 (Requested range not satisfiable). Otherwise, the server
SHOULD return a response with a status of 206 (Partial Content)
containing the satisfiable ranges of the entity-body.
Examples of byte-ranges-specifier values (assuming an entity-body of
- Several legal but not canonical specifications of the second 500
HTTP retrieval requests using conditional or unconditional GET
methods MAY request one or more sub-ranges of the entity, instead of
the entire entity, using the Range request header, which applies to
the entity returned as the result of the request:
Range = "Range" ":" ranges-specifier
A server MAY ignore the Range header. However, HTTP/1.1 origin
servers and intermediate caches ought to support byte ranges when
possible, since Range supports efficient recovery from partially
failed transfers, and supports efficient partial retrieval of large
If the server supports the Range header and the specified range or
ranges are appropriate for the entity:
- The presence of a Range header in an unconditional GET modifies
what is returned if the GET is otherwise successful. In other
words, the response carries a status code of 206 (Partial
- The presence of a Range header in a conditional GET (a request
using one or both of If-Modified-Since and If-None-Match, or
one or both of If-Unmodified-Since and If-Match) modifies what
is returned if the GET is otherwise successful and the
condition is true. It does not affect the 304 (Not Modified)
response returned if the conditional is false.
In some cases, it might be more appropriate to use the If-Range
header (see section 14.27) in addition to the Range header.
If a proxy that supports ranges receives a Range request, forwards
the request to an inbound server, and receives an entire entity in
reply, it SHOULD only return the requested range to its client. It
SHOULD store the entire received response in its cache if that is
consistent with its cache allocation policies.
The Referer[sic] request-header field allows the client to specify,
for the server's benefit, the address (URI) of the resource from
which the Request-URI was obtained (the "referrer", although the
header field is misspelled.) The Referer request-header allows a
server to generate lists of back-links to resources for interest,
logging, optimized caching, etc. It also allows obsolete or mistyped
links to be traced for maintenance. The Referer field MUST NOT be
sent if the Request-URI was obtained from a source that does not have
its own URI, such as input from the user keyboard.
Referer: http://www.w3.org/hypertext/DataSources/Overview.html
If the field value is a relative URI, it SHOULD be interpreted
relative to the Request-URI. The URI MUST NOT include a fragment. See
section 15.1.3 for security considerations.
The Retry-After response-header field can be used with a 503 (Service
Unavailable) response to indicate how long the service is expected to
be unavailable to the requesting client. This field MAY also be used
with any 3xx (Redirection) response to indicate the minimum time the
user-agent is asked wait before issuing the redirected request. The
value of this field can be either an HTTP-date or an integer number
of seconds (in decimal) after the time of the response.
Retry-After  = "Retry-After" ":" ( HTTP-date | delta-seconds )
Two examples of its use are
In the latter example, the delay is 2 minutes.
The Server response-header field contains information about the
software used by the origin server to handle the request. The field
can contain multiple product tokens (section 3.8) and comments
identifying the server and any significant subproducts. The product
tokens are listed in order of their significance for identifying the
If the response is being forwarded through a proxy, the proxy
application MUST NOT modify the Server response-header. Instead, it
SHOULD include a Via field (as described in section 14.45).
Note: Revealing the specific software version of the server might
allow the server machine to become more vulnerable to attacks
against software that is known to contain security holes. Server
implementors are encouraged to make this field a configurable
The TE request-header field indicates what extension transfer-codings
it is willing to accept in the response and whether or not it is
willing to accept trailer fields in a chunked transfer-coding. Its
value may consist of the keyword "trailers" and/or a comma-separated
list of extension transfer-coding names with optional accept
parameters (as described in section 3.6).
t-codings = "trailers" | ( transfer-extension [ accept-params ] )
The presence of the keyword "trailers" indicates that the client is
willing to accept trailer fields in a chunked transfer-coding, as
defined in section 3.6.1. This keyword is reserved for use with
transfer-coding values even though it does not itself represent a
The TE header field only applies to the immediate connection.
Therefore, the keyword MUST be supplied within a Connection header
field (section 14.10) whenever TE is present in an HTTP/1.1 message.
A server tests whether a transfer-coding is acceptable, according to
a TE field, using these rules:
keyword "trailers" is listed, the client indicates that it is
willing to accept trailer fields in the chunked response on
behalf of itself and any downstream clients. The implication is
that, if given, the client is stating that either all
downstream clients are willing to accept trailer fields in the
forwarded response, or that it will attempt to buffer the
response on behalf of downstream recipients.
Note: HTTP/1.1 does not define any means to limit the size of a
chunked response such that a client can be assured of buffering
codings listed in the TE field, then it is acceptable unless it
is accompanied by a qvalue of 0. (As defined in section 3.9, a
acceptable transfer-coding with the highest non-zero qvalue is
preferred.  The "chunked" transfer-coding always has a qvalue
If the TE field-value is empty or if no TE field is present, the only
transfer-coding  is "chunked". A message with no transfer-coding is
The Trailer general field value indicates that the given set of
header fields is present in the trailer of a message encoded with
chunked transfer-coding.
An HTTP/1.1 message SHOULD include a Trailer header field in a
message using chunked transfer-coding with a non-empty trailer. Doing
so allows the recipient to know which header fields to expect in the
If no Trailer header field is present, the trailer SHOULD NOT include
any header fields. See section 3.6.1 for restrictions on the use of
trailer fields in a "chunked" transfer-coding.
Message header fields listed in the Trailer header field MUST NOT
include the following header fields:
The Transfer-Encoding general-header field indicates what (if any)
type of transformation has been applied to the message body in order
to safely transfer it between the sender and the recipient. This
differs from the content-coding in that the transfer-coding is a
property of the message, not of the entity.
Transfer-Encoding       = "Transfer-Encoding" ":" 1#transfer-coding
Transfer-codings are defined in section 3.6. An example is:
Transfer-Encoding: chunked
If multiple encodings have been applied to an entity, the transfer-
Many older HTTP/1.0 applications do not understand the Transfer-
The Upgrade general-header allows the client to specify what
additional communication protocols it supports and would like to use
if the server finds it appropriate to switch protocols. The server
MUST use the Upgrade header field within a 101 (Switching Protocols)
response to indicate which protocol(s) are being switched.
The Upgrade header field is intended to provide a simple mechanism
for transition from HTTP/1.1 to some other, incompatible protocol. It
does so by allowing the client to advertise its desire to use another
protocol, such as a later version of HTTP with a higher major version
number, even though the current request has been made using HTTP/1.1.
This eases the difficult transition between incompatible protocols by
allowing the client to initiate a request in the more commonly
supported protocol while indicating to the server that it would like
to use a "better" protocol if available (where "better" is determined
by the server, possibly according to the nature of the method and/or
resource being requested).
The Upgrade header field only applies to switching application-layer
protocols upon the existing transport-layer connection. Upgrade
cannot be used to insist on a protocol change; its acceptance and use
by the server is optional. The capabilities and nature of the
application-layer communication after the protocol change is entirely
dependent upon the new protocol chosen, although the first action
after changing the protocol MUST be a response to the initial HTTP
request containing the Upgrade header field.
The Upgrade header field only applies to the immediate connection.
Therefore, the upgrade keyword MUST be supplied within a Connection
header field (section 14.10) whenever Upgrade is present in an
The Upgrade header field cannot be used to indicate a switch to a
protocol on a different connection. For that purpose, it is more
appropriate to use a 301, 302, 303, or 305 redirection response.
This specification only defines the protocol name "HTTP" for use by
the family of Hypertext Transfer Protocols, as defined by the HTTP
version rules of section 3.1 and future updates to this
specification. Any token can be used as a protocol name; however, it
will only be useful if both the client and server associate the name
The User-Agent request-header field contains information about the
user agent originating the request. This is for statistical purposes,
the tracing of protocol violations, and automated recognition of user
agents for the sake of tailoring responses to avoid particular user
agent limitations. User agents SHOULD include this field with
requests. The field can contain multiple product tokens (section 3.8)
and comments identifying the agent and any subproducts which form a
significant part of the user agent. By convention, the product tokens
are listed in order of their significance for identifying the
The Vary field value indicates the set of request-header fields that
fully determines, while the response is fresh, whether a cache is
permitted to use the response to reply to a subsequent request
without revalidation. For uncacheable or stale responses, the Vary
field value advises the user agent about the criteria that were used
to select the representation. A Vary field value of "*" implies that
a cache cannot determine from the request headers of a subsequent
request whether this response is the appropriate representation. See
section 13.6 for use of the Vary header field by caches.
An HTTP/1.1 server SHOULD include a Vary header field with any
cacheable response that is subject to server-driven negotiation.
Doing so allows a cache to properly interpret future requests on that
resource and informs the user agent about the presence of negotiation
on that resource. A server MAY include a Vary header field with a
non-cacheable response that is subject to server-driven negotiation,
since this might provide the user agent with useful information about
the dimensions over which the response varies at the time of the
A Vary field value consisting of a list of field-names signals that
the representation selected for the response is based on a selection
algorithm which considers ONLY the listed request-header field values
in selecting the most appropriate representation. A cache MAY assume
that the same selection will be made for future requests with the
same values for the listed field names, for the duration of time for
which the response is fresh.
The field-names given are not limited to the set of standard
request-header fields defined by this specification. Field names are
A Vary field value of "*" signals that unspecified parameters not
limited to the request-headers (e.g., the network address of the
client), play a role in the selection of the response representation.
The "*" value MUST NOT be generated by a proxy server; it may only be
generated by an origin server.
The Via general-header field MUST be used by gateways and proxies to
indicate the intermediate protocols and recipients between the user
agent and the server on requests, and between the origin server and
the client on responses. It is analogous to the "Received" field of
RFC 822 [9] and is intended to be used for tracking message forwards,
avoiding request loops, and identifying the protocol capabilities of
all senders along the request/response chain.
Via =  "Via" ":" 1#( received-protocol received-by [ comment ] )
received-protocol = [ protocol-name "/" ] protocol-version
protocol-version  = token
The received-protocol indicates the protocol version of the message
received by the server or client along each segment of the
request/response chain. The received-protocol version is appended to
the Via field value when the message is forwarded so that information
about the protocol capabilities of upstream applications remains
visible to all recipients.
The protocol-name is optional if and only if it would be "HTTP". The
received-by field is normally the host and optional port number of a
recipient server or client that subsequently forwarded the message.
However, if the real host is considered to be sensitive information,
it MAY be replaced by a pseudonym. If the port is not given, it MAY
be assumed to be the default port of the received-protocol.
Multiple Via field values represents each proxy or gateway that has
forwarded the message. Each recipient MUST append its information
such that the end result is ordered according to the sequence of
forwarding applications.
Comments MAY be used in the Via header field to identify the software
of the recipient proxy or gateway, analogous to the User-Agent and
Server header fields. However, all comments in the Via field are
optional and MAY be removed by any recipient prior to forwarding the
For example, a request message could be sent from an HTTP/1.0 user
agent to an internal proxy code-named "fred", which uses HTTP/1.1 to
forward the request to a public proxy at nowhere.com, which completes
the request by forwarding it to the origin server at www.ics.uci.edu.
The request received by www.ics.uci.edu would then have the following
Proxies and gateways used as a portal through a network firewall
SHOULD NOT, by default, forward the names and ports of hosts within
the firewall region. This information SHOULD only be propagated if
explicitly enabled. If not enabled, the received-by host of any host
behind the firewall SHOULD be replaced by an appropriate pseudonym
For organizations that have strong privacy requirements for hiding
internal structures, a proxy MAY combine an ordered subsequence of
Via header field entries with identical received-protocol values into
a single such entry. For example,
Applications SHOULD NOT combine multiple entries unless they are all
under the same organizational control and the hosts have already been
replaced by pseudonyms. Applications MUST NOT combine entries which
have different received-protocol values.
The Warning general-header field is used to carry additional
information about the status or transformation of a message which
might not be reflected in the message. This information is typically
used to warn about a possible lack of semantic transparency from
caching operations or transformations applied to the entity body of
Warning headers are sent with responses using:
warning-value = warn-code SP warn-agent SP warn-text
warn-text  = quoted-string
A response MAY carry more than one Warning header.
The warn-text SHOULD be in a natural language and character set that
is most likely to be intelligible to the human user receiving the
response. This decision MAY be based on any available knowledge, such
as the location of the cache or user, the Accept-Language field in a
request, the Content-Language field in a response, etc. The default
language is English and the default character set is ISO-8859-1.
If a character set other than ISO-8859-1 is used, it MUST be encoded
in the warn-text using the method described in RFC 2047 [14].
Warning headers can in general be applied to any message, however
some specific warn-codes are specific to caches and can only be
applied to response messages. New Warning headers SHOULD be added
after any existing Warning headers. A cache MUST NOT delete any
Warning header that it received with a message. However, if a cache
successfully validates a cache entry, it SHOULD remove any Warning
headers previously attached to that entry except as specified for
specific Warning codes. It MUST then add any Warning headers received
in the validating response. In other words, Warning headers are those
that would be attached to the most recent relevant response.
When multiple Warning headers are attached to a response, the user
agent ought to inform the user of as many of them as possible, in the
order that they appear in the response. If it is not possible to
inform the user of all of the warnings, the user agent SHOULD follow
- Warnings that appear early in the response take priority over
those appearing later in the response.
- Warnings in the user's preferred character set take priority
over warnings in other character sets but with identical warn-
Systems that generate multiple Warning headers SHOULD order them with
this user agent behavior in mind.
Requirements for the behavior of caches with respect to Warnings are
This is a list of the currently-defined warn-codes, each with a
recommended warn-text in English, and a description of its meaning.
MUST be included whenever the returned response is stale.
MUST be included if a cache returns a stale response because an
attempt to revalidate the response failed, due to an inability to
SHOULD be included if the cache is intentionally disconnected from
the rest of the network for a period of time.
MUST be included if the cache heuristically chose a freshness
lifetime greater than 24 hours and the response's age is greater
The warning text MAY include arbitrary information to be presented
to a human user, or logged. A system receiving this warning MUST
NOT take any automated action, besides presenting the warning to
MUST be added by an intermediate cache or proxy if it applies any
transformation changing the content-coding (as specified in the
Content-Encoding header) or media-type (as specified in the
Content-Type header) of the response, or the entity-body of the
response, unless this Warning code already appears in the response.
NOT take any automated action.
If an implementation sends a message with one or more Warning headers
whose version is HTTP/1.0 or lower, then the sender MUST include in
each warning-value a warn-date that matches the date in the response.
If an implementation receives a message with a warning-value that
includes a warn-date, and that warn-date is different from the Date
value in the response, then that warning-value MUST be deleted from
the message before storing, forwarding, or using it. (This prevents
bad consequences of naive caching of Warning header fields.) If all
of the warning-values are deleted for this reason, the Warning header
The WWW-Authenticate response-header field MUST be included in 401
(Unauthorized) response messages. The field value consists of at
least one challenge that indicates the authentication scheme(s) and
parameters applicable to the Request-URI.
WWW-Authenticate  = "WWW-Authenticate" ":" 1#challenge
Authentication: Basic and Digest Access Authentication" [43]. User
agents are advised to take special care in parsing the WWW-
Authenticate field value as it might contain more than one challenge,
or if more than one WWW-Authenticate header field is provided, the
contents of a challenge itself can contain a comma-separated list of
authentication parameters.
This section is meant to inform application developers, information
providers, and users of the security limitations in HTTP/1.1 as
described by this document. The discussion does not include
definitive solutions to the problems revealed, though it does make
some suggestions for reducing security risks.
HTTP clients are often privy to large amounts of personal information
(e.g. the user's name, location, mail address, passwords, encryption
keys, etc.), and SHOULD be very careful to prevent unintentional
leakage of this information via the HTTP protocol to other sources.
We very strongly recommend that a convenient interface be provided
for the user to control dissemination of such information, and that
designers and implementors be particularly careful in this area.
History shows that errors in this area often create serious security
and/or privacy problems and generate highly adverse publicity for the
A server is in the position to save personal data about a user's
requests which might identify their reading patterns or subjects of
interest. This information is clearly confidential in nature and its
handling can be constrained by law in certain countries. People using
the HTTP protocol to provide data are responsible for ensuring that
such material is not distributed without the permission of any
individuals that are identifiable by the published results.
Like any generic data transfer protocol, HTTP cannot regulate the
content of the data that is transferred, nor is there any a priori
method of determining the sensitivity of any particular piece of
information within the context of any given request. Therefore,
applications SHOULD supply as much control over this information as
possible to the provider of that information. Four header fields are
worth special mention in this context: Server, Via, Referer and From.
Revealing the specific software version of the server might allow the
server machine to become more vulnerable to attacks against software
that is known to contain security holes. Implementors SHOULD make the
Server header field a configurable option.
Proxies which serve as a portal through a network firewall SHOULD
take special precautions regarding the transfer of header information
that identifies the hosts behind the firewall. In particular, they
SHOULD remove, or replace with sanitized versions, any Via fields
generated behind the firewall.
The Referer header allows reading patterns to be studied and reverse
links drawn. Although it can be very useful, its power can be abused
if user details are not separated from the information contained in
the Referer. Even when the personal information has been removed, the
Referer header might indicate a private document's URI whose
publication would be inappropriate.
The information sent in the From field might conflict with the user's
privacy interests or their site's security policy, and hence it
SHOULD NOT be transmitted without the user being able to disable,
enable, and modify the contents of the field. The user MUST be able
to set the contents of this field within a user preference or
application defaults configuration.
We suggest, though do not require, that a convenient toggle interface
be provided for the user to enable or disable the sending of From and
The User-Agent (section 14.43) or Server (section 14.38) header
fields can sometimes be used to determine that a specific client or
server have a particular security hole which might be exploited.
Unfortunately, this same information is often used for other valuable
purposes for which HTTP currently has no better mechanism.
Because the source of a link might be private information or might
reveal an otherwise private information source, it is strongly
recommended that the user be able to select whether or not the
Referer field is sent. For example, a browser client could have a
toggle switch for browsing openly/anonymously, which would
respectively enable/disable the sending of Referer and From
Clients SHOULD NOT include a Referer header field in a (non-secure)
HTTP request if the referring page was transferred with a secure
Authors of services which use the HTTP protocol SHOULD NOT use GET
based forms for the submission of sensitive data, because this will
cause this data to be encoded in the Request-URI. Many existing
servers, proxies, and user agents will log the request URI in some
place where it might be visible to third parties. Servers can use
POST-based form submission instead
Accept request-headers can reveal information about the user to all
servers which are accessed. The Accept-Language header in particular
can reveal information the user would consider to be of a private
nature, because the understanding of particular languages is often
strongly correlated to the membership of a particular ethnic group.
User agents which offer the option to configure the contents of an
Accept-Language header to be sent in every request are strongly
encouraged to let the configuration process include a message which
makes the user aware of the loss of privacy involved.
An approach that limits the loss of privacy would be for a user agent
to omit the sending of Accept-Language headers by default, and to ask
the user whether or not to start sending Accept-Language headers to a
server if it detects, by looking for any Vary response-header fields
generated by the server, that such sending could improve the quality
Elaborate user-customized accept header fields sent in every request,
in particular if these include quality values, can be used by servers
as relatively reliable and long-lived user identifiers. Such user
identifiers would allow content providers to do click-trail tracking,
and would allow collaborating content providers to match cross-server
click-trails or form submissions of individual users. Note that for
many users not behind a proxy, the network address of the host
running the user agent will also serve as a long-lived user
identifier. In environments where proxies are used to enhance
privacy, user agents ought to be conservative in offering accept
header configuration options to end users. As an extreme privacy
measure, proxies could filter the accept headers in relayed requests.
General purpose user agents which provide a high degree of header
configurability SHOULD warn users about the loss of privacy which can
Implementations of HTTP origin servers SHOULD be careful to restrict
the documents returned by HTTP requests to be only those that were
intended by the server administrators. If an HTTP server translates
HTTP URIs directly into file system calls, the server MUST take
special care not to serve files that were not intended to be
delivered to HTTP clients. For example, UNIX, Microsoft Windows, and
other operating systems use ".." as a path component to indicate a
directory level above the current one. On such a system, an HTTP
server MUST disallow any such construct in the Request-URI if it
would otherwise allow access to a resource outside those intended to
be accessible via the HTTP server. Similarly, files intended for
reference only internally to the server (such as access control
files, configuration files, and script code) MUST be protected from
inappropriate retrieval, since they might contain sensitive
information. Experience has shown that minor bugs in such HTTP server
implementations have turned into security risks.
Clients using HTTP rely heavily on the Domain Name Service, and are
thus generally prone to security attacks based on the deliberate
mis-association of IP addresses and DNS names. Clients need to be
cautious in assuming the continuing validity of an IP number/DNS name
In particular, HTTP clients SHOULD rely on their name resolver for
confirmation of an IP number/DNS name association, rather than
caching the result of previous host name lookups. Many platforms
already can cache host name lookups locally when appropriate, and
they SHOULD be configured to do so. It is proper for these lookups to
be cached, however, only when the TTL (Time To Live) information
reported by the name server makes it likely that the cached
information will remain useful.
If HTTP clients cache the results of host name lookups in order to
achieve a performance improvement, they MUST observe the TTL
information reported by DNS.
If HTTP clients do not observe this rule, they could be spoofed when
a previously-accessed server's IP address changes. As network
renumbering is expected to become increasingly common [24], the
possibility of this form of attack will grow. Observing this
requirement thus reduces this potential security vulnerability.
This requirement also improves the load-balancing behavior of clients
for replicated servers using the same DNS name and reduces the
likelihood of a user's experiencing failure in accessing sites which
If a single server supports multiple organizations that do not trust
one another, then it MUST check the values of Location and Content-
Location headers in responses that are generated under control of
said organizations to make sure that they do not attempt to
invalidate resources over which they have no authority.
RFC 1806 [35], from which the often implemented Content-Disposition
(see section 19.5.1) header in HTTP is derived, has a number of very
serious security considerations. Content-Disposition is not part of
the HTTP standard, but since it is widely implemented, we are
documenting its use and risks for implementors. See RFC 2183 [49]
(which updates RFC 1806) for details.
Existing HTTP clients and user agents typically retain authentication
information indefinitely. HTTP/1.1. does not provide a method for a
server to direct clients to discard these cached credentials. This is
a significant defect that requires further extensions to HTTP.
Circumstances under which credential caching can interfere with the
application's security model include but are not limited to:
- Clients which have been idle for an extended period following
which the server might wish to cause the client to reprompt the
- Applications which include a session termination indication
(such as a `logout' or `commit' button on a page) after which
the server side of the application `knows' that there is no
further reason for the client to retain the credentials.
This is currently under separate study. There are a number of work-
arounds to parts of this problem, and we encourage the use of
password protection in screen savers, idle time-outs, and other
methods which mitigate the security problems inherent in this
problem. In particular, user agents which cache credentials are
encouraged to provide a readily accessible mechanism for discarding
cached credentials under user control.
By their very nature, HTTP proxies are men-in-the-middle, and
represent an opportunity for man-in-the-middle attacks. Compromise of
the systems on which the proxies run can result in serious security
and privacy problems. Proxies have access to security-related
information, personal information about individual users and
organizations, and proprietary information belonging to users and
content providers. A compromised proxy, or a proxy implemented or
configured without regard to security and privacy considerations,
might be used in the commission of a wide range of potential attacks.
Proxy operators should protect the systems on which proxies run as
they would protect any system that contains or transports sensitive
information. In particular, log information gathered at proxies often
contains highly sensitive personal information, and/or information
about organizations. Log information should be carefully guarded, and
appropriate guidelines for use developed and followed. (Section
Caching proxies provide additional potential vulnerabilities, since
the contents of the cache represent an attractive target for
malicious exploitation. Because cache contents persist after an HTTP
request is complete, an attack on the cache can reveal information
long after a user believes that the information has been removed from
the network. Therefore, cache contents should be protected as
sensitive information.
Proxy implementors should consider the privacy and security
implications of their design and coding decisions, and of the
configuration options they provide to proxy operators (especially the
default configuration).
Users of a proxy need to be aware that they are no trustworthier than
the people who run the proxy; HTTP itself cannot solve this problem.
The judicious use of cryptography, when appropriate, may suffice to
protect against a broad range of security and privacy attacks. Such
cryptography is beyond the scope of the HTTP/1.1 specification.
They exist. They are hard to defend against. Research continues.
This specification makes heavy use of the augmented BNF and generic
constructs defined by David H. Crocker for RFC 822 [9]. Similarly, it
reuses many of the definitions provided by Nathaniel Borenstein and
Ned Freed for MIME [7]. We hope that their inclusion in this
specification will help reduce past confusion over the relationship
between HTTP and Internet mail message formats.
The HTTP protocol has evolved considerably over the years. It has
benefited from a large and active developer community--the many
people who have participated on the www-talk mailing list--and it is
that community which has been most responsible for the success of
HTTP and of the World-Wide Web in general. Marc Andreessen, Robert
Cailliau, Daniel W. Connolly, Bob Denny, John Franks, Jean-Francois
Groff, Phillip M. Hallam-Baker, Hakon W. Lie, Ari Luotonen, Rob
McCool, Lou Montulli, Dave Raggett, Tony Sanders, and Marc
VanHeyningen deserve special recognition for their efforts in
defining early aspects of the protocol.
This document has benefited greatly from the comments of all those
participating in the HTTP-WG. In addition to those already mentioned,
the following individuals have contributed to this specification:
Harald Tveit Alvestrand     Albert Lunde
Brian Behlendorf            Jean-Philippe Martin-Flatin
Maurizio Codogno            David Morris
Daniel LaLiberte            Bill (BearHeart) Weinman
Much of the content and presentation of the caching design is due to
suggestions and comments from individuals including: Shel Kaphan,
Paul Leach, Koen Holtman, David Morris, and Larry Masinter.
Most of the specification of ranges is based on work originally done
by Ari Luotonen and John Franks, with additional input from Steve
Thanks to the "cave men" of Palo Alto. You know who you are.
Jim Gettys (the current editor of this document) wishes particularly
to thank Roy Fielding, the previous editor of this document, along
with John Klensin, Jeff Mogul, Paul Leach, Dave Kristol, Koen
Holtman, John Franks, Josh Cohen, Alex Hopmann, Scott Lawrence, and
Larry Masinter for their help. And thanks go particularly to Jeff
Mogul and Scott Lawrence for performing the "MUST/MAY/SHOULD" audit.
The Apache Group, Anselm Baird-Smith, author of Jigsaw, and Henrik
Frystyk implemented RFC 2068 early, and we wish to thank them for the
discovery of many of the problems that this document attempts to
[1] Alvestrand, H., "Tags for the Identification of Languages", RFC
[2] Anklesaria, F., McCahill, M., Lindner, P., Johnson, D., Torrey,
D. and B. Alberti, "The Internet Gopher Protocol (a distributed
document search and retrieval protocol)", RFC 1436, March 1993.
[3] Berners-Lee, T., "Universal Resource Identifiers in WWW", RFC
[4] Berners-Lee, T., Masinter, L. and M. McCahill, "Uniform Resource
[5] Berners-Lee, T. and D. Connolly, "Hypertext Markup Language -
[6] Berners-Lee, T., Fielding, R. and H. Frystyk, "Hypertext Transfer
[7] Freed, N. and N. Borenstein, "Multipurpose Internet Mail
Extensions (MIME) Part One: Format of Internet Message Bodies",
[9] Crocker, D., "Standard for The Format of ARPA Internet Text
Sui, J., and M. Grinbaum, "WAIS Interface Protocol Prototype
Functional Specification," (v1.5), Thinking Machines
[11] Fielding, R., "Relative Uniform Resource Locators", RFC 1808,
[12] Horton, M. and R. Adams, "Standard for Interchange of USENET
[13] Kantor, B. and P. Lapsley, "Network News Transfer Protocol", RFC
[14] Moore, K., "MIME (Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions) Part
Three: Message Header Extensions for Non-ASCII Text", RFC 2047,
[15] Nebel, E. and L. Masinter, "Form-based File Upload in HTML", RFC
[20] Sollins, K. and L. Masinter, "Functional Requirements for
[21] US-ASCII. Coded Character Set - 7-Bit American Standard Code for
Information Interchange. Standard ANSI X3.4-1986, ANSI, 1986.
[22] ISO-8859. International Standard -- Information Processing --
8-bit Single-Byte Coded Graphic Character Sets --
[23] Meyers, J. and M. Rose, "The Content-MD5 Header Field", RFC
[24] Carpenter, B. and Y. Rekhter, "Renumbering Needs Work", RFC
[25] Deutsch, P., "GZIP file format specification version 4.3", RFC
[26] Venkata N. Padmanabhan, and Jeffrey C. Mogul. "Improving HTTP
Latency", Computer Networks and ISDN Systems, v. 28, pp. 25-35,
Dec. 1995. Slightly revised version of paper in Proc. 2nd
International WWW Conference '94: Mosaic and the Web, Oct. 1994,
http://www.ncsa.uiuc.edu/SDG/IT94/Proceedings/DDay/mogul/HTTPLat
[27] Joe Touch, John Heidemann, and Katia Obraczka. "Analysis of HTTP
Performance", <URL: http://www.isi.edu/touch/pubs/http-perf96/>,
ISI Research Report ISI/RR-98-463, (original report dated Aug.
1996), USC/Information Sciences Institute, August 1998.
[28] Mills, D., "Network Time Protocol (Version 3) Specification,
Implementation and Analysis", RFC 1305, March 1992.
[29] Deutsch, P., "DEFLATE Compressed Data Format Specification
[30] S. Spero, "Analysis of HTTP Performance Problems,"
http://sunsite.unc.edu/mdma-release/http-prob.html.
[31] Deutsch, P. and J. Gailly, "ZLIB Compressed Data Format
[32] Franks, J., Hallam-Baker, P., Hostetler, J., Leach, P.,
Luotonen, A., Sink, E. and L. Stewart, "An Extension to HTTP:
Digest Access Authentication", RFC 2069, January 1997.
Berners-Lee, "Hypertext Transfer Protocol -- HTTP/1.1", RFC
[34] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
[35] Troost, R. and Dorner, S., "Communicating Presentation
Information in Internet Messages: The Content-Disposition
[36] Mogul, J., Fielding, R., Gettys, J. and H. Frystyk, "Use and
Interpretation of HTTP Version Numbers", RFC 2145, May 1997.
[37] Palme, J., "Common Internet Message Headers", RFC 2076, February
[38] Yergeau, F., "UTF-8, a transformation format of Unicode and
[39] Nielsen, H.F., Gettys, J., Baird-Smith, A., Prud'hommeaux, E.,
Lie, H., and C. Lilley. "Network Performance Effects of
HTTP/1.1, CSS1, and PNG," Proceedings of ACM SIGCOMM '97, Cannes
[40] Freed, N. and N. Borenstein, "Multipurpose Internet Mail
Extensions (MIME) Part Two: Media Types", RFC 2046, November
[41] Alvestrand, H., "IETF Policy on Character Sets and Languages",
[42] Berners-Lee, T., Fielding, R. and L. Masinter, "Uniform Resource
Identifiers (URI): Generic Syntax and Semantics", RFC 2396,
[43] Franks, J., Hallam-Baker, P., Hostetler, J., Lawrence, S.,
Leach, P., Luotonen, A., Sink, E. and L. Stewart, "HTTP
Authentication: Basic and Digest Access Authentication", RFC
[44] Luotonen, A., "Tunneling TCP based protocols through Web proxy
[45] Palme, J. and A. Hopmann, "MIME E-mail Encapsulation of
Aggregate Documents, such as HTML (MHTML)", RFC 2110, March
[46] Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP
[47] Masinter, L., "Hyper Text Coffee Pot Control Protocol
[48] Freed, N. and N. Borenstein, "Multipurpose Internet Mail
Extensions (MIME) Part Five: Conformance Criteria and Examples",
[49] Troost, R., Dorner, S. and K. Moore, "Communicating Presentation
Information in Internet Messages: The Content-Disposition Header
Information and Computer Science
University of California, Irvine
EMail: fielding@ics.uci.edu
World Wide Web Consortium
MIT Laboratory for Computer Science
Western Research Laboratory
Compaq Computer Corporation
Palo Alto, California, 94305, USA
Henrik Frystyk Nielsen
EMail: masinter@parc.xerox.com
Microsoft Corporation
EMail: paulle@microsoft.com
Director, World Wide Web Consortium
In addition to defining the HTTP/1.1 protocol, this document serves
as the specification for the Internet media type "message/http" and
"application/http". The message/http type can be used to enclose a
single HTTP request or response message, provided that it obeys the
MIME restrictions for all "message" types regarding line length and
encodings. The application/http type can be used to enclose a
pipeline of one or more HTTP request or response messages (not
intermixed). The following is to be registered with IANA [17].
Media subtype name:      http
Required parameters:     none
Optional parameters:     version, msgtype
version: The HTTP-Version number of the enclosed message
determined from the first line of the body.
msgtype: The message type -- "request" or "response". If not
present, the type can be determined from the first
Encoding considerations: only "7bit", "8bit", or "binary" are
Security considerations: none
Media Type name:         application
version: The HTTP-Version number of the enclosed messages
Encoding considerations: HTTP messages enclosed by this type
are in "binary" format; use of an appropriate
Content-Transfer-Encoding is required when
When an HTTP 206 (Partial Content) response message includes the
content of multiple ranges (a response to a request for multiple
non-overlapping ranges), these are transmitted as a multipart
message-body. The media type for this purpose is called
The multipart/byteranges media type includes two or more parts, each
with its own Content-Type and Content-Range fields. The required
boundary parameter specifies the boundary string used to separate
Media subtype name:      byteranges
Required parameters:     boundary
Optional parameters:     none
Content-type: multipart/byteranges; boundary=THIS_STRING_SEPARATES
Content-type: application/pdf
1) Additional CRLFs may precede the first boundary string in the
2) Although RFC 2046 [40] permits the boundary string to be
quoted, some existing implementations handle a quoted boundary
3) A number of browsers and servers were coded to an early draft
of the byteranges specification to use a media type of
multipart/x-byteranges, which is almost, but not quite
compatible with the version documented in HTTP/1.1.
Although this document specifies the requirements for the generation
of HTTP/1.1 messages, not all applications will be correct in their
implementation. We therefore recommend that operational applications
be tolerant of deviations whenever those deviations can be
interpreted unambiguously.
Clients SHOULD be tolerant in parsing the Status-Line and servers
tolerant when parsing the Request-Line. In particular, they SHOULD
accept any amount of SP or HT characters between fields, even though
only a single SP is required.
The line terminator for message-header fields is the sequence CRLF.
However, we recommend that applications, when parsing such headers,
recognize a single LF as a line terminator and ignore the leading CR.
The character set of an entity-body SHOULD be labeled as the lowest
common denominator of the character codes used within that body, with
the exception that not labeling the entity is preferred over labeling
the entity with the labels US-ASCII or ISO-8859-1. See section 3.7.1
Additional rules for requirements on parsing and encoding of dates
and other potential problems with date encodings include:
- HTTP/1.1 clients and caches SHOULD assume that an RFC-850 date
which appears to be more than 50 years in the future is in fact
in the past (this helps solve the "year 2000" problem).
- An HTTP/1.1 implementation MAY internally represent a parsed
Expires date as earlier than the proper value, but MUST NOT
internally represent a parsed Expires date as later than the
- All expiration-related calculations MUST be done in GMT. The
local time zone MUST NOT influence the calculation or comparison
of an age or expiration time.
- If an HTTP header incorrectly carries a date value with a time
zone other than GMT, it MUST be converted into GMT using the
most conservative possible conversion.
HTTP/1.1 uses many of the constructs defined for Internet Mail (RFC
allow entities to be transmitted in an open variety of
representations and with extensible mechanisms. However, RFC 2045
discusses mail, and HTTP has a few features that are different from
those described in RFC 2045. These differences were carefully chosen
to optimize performance over binary connections, to allow greater
freedom in the use of new media types, to make date comparisons
easier, and to acknowledge the practice of some early HTTP servers
This appendix describes specific areas where HTTP differs from RFC
aware of these differences and provide the appropriate conversions
where necessary. Proxies and gateways from MIME environments to HTTP
also need to be aware of the differences because some conversions
HTTP is not a MIME-compliant protocol. However, HTTP/1.1 messages MAY
include a single MIME-Version general-header field to indicate what
version of the MIME protocol was used to construct the message. Use
of the MIME-Version header field indicates that the message is in
full compliance with the MIME protocol (as defined in RFC 2045[7]).
Proxies/gateways are responsible for ensuring full compliance (where
possible) when exporting HTTP messages to strict MIME environments.
MIME version "1.0" is the default for use in HTTP/1.1. However,
HTTP/1.1 message parsing and semantics are defined by this document
and not the MIME specification.
RFC 2045 [7] requires that an Internet mail entity be converted to
canonical form prior to being transferred, as described in section 4
of RFC 2049 [48]. Section 3.7.1 of this document describes the forms
allowed for subtypes of the "text" media type when transmitted over
HTTP. RFC 2046 requires that content with a type of "text" represent
line breaks as CRLF and forbids the use of CR or LF outside of line
break sequences. HTTP allows CRLF, bare CR, and bare LF to indicate a
line break within text content when a message is transmitted over
Where it is possible, a proxy or gateway from HTTP to a strict MIME
environment SHOULD translate all line breaks within the text media
types described in section 3.7.1 of this document to the RFC 2049
canonical form of CRLF. Note, however, that this might be complicated
by the presence of a Content-Encoding and by the fact that HTTP
allows the use of some character sets which do not use octets 13 and
Implementors should note that conversion will break any cryptographic
checksums applied to the original content unless the original content
is already in canonical form. Therefore, the canonical form is
recommended for any content that uses such checksums in HTTP.
HTTP/1.1 uses a restricted set of date formats (section 3.3.1) to
simplify the process of date comparison. Proxies and gateways from
other protocols SHOULD ensure that any Date header field present in a
message conforms to one of the HTTP/1.1 formats and rewrite the date
RFC 2045 does not include any concept equivalent to HTTP/1.1's
Content-Encoding header field. Since this acts as a modifier on the
media type, proxies and gateways from HTTP to MIME-compliant
protocols MUST either change the value of the Content-Type header
field or decode the entity-body before forwarding the message. (Some
experimental applications of Content-Type for Internet mail have used
a media-type parameter of ";conversions=<content-coding>" to perform
a function equivalent to Content-Encoding. However, this parameter is
HTTP does not use the Content-Transfer-Encoding (CTE) field of RFC
remove any non-identity CTE ("quoted-printable" or "base64") encoding
prior to delivering the response message to an HTTP client.
Proxies and gateways from HTTP to MIME-compliant protocols are
responsible for ensuring that the message is in the correct format
and encoding for safe transport on that protocol, where "safe
transport" is defined by the limitations of the protocol being used.
Such a proxy or gateway SHOULD label the data with an appropriate
Content-Transfer-Encoding if doing so will improve the likelihood of
safe transport over the destination protocol.
HTTP/1.1 introduces the Transfer-Encoding header field (section
14.41). Proxies/gateways MUST remove any transfer-coding prior to
forwarding a message via a MIME-compliant protocol.
A process for decoding the "chunked" transfer-coding (section 3.6)
can be represented in pseudo-code as:
read chunk-size, chunk-extension (if any) and CRLF
read chunk-data and CRLF
append chunk-data to entity-body
read chunk-size and CRLF
while (entity-header not empty) {
append entity-header to existing header fields
Remove "chunked" from Transfer-Encoding
HTTP implementations which share code with MHTML [45] implementations
need to be aware of MIME line length limitations. Since HTTP does not
have this limitation, HTTP does not fold long lines. MHTML messages
being transported by HTTP follow all conventions of MHTML, including
line length limitations and folding, canonicalization, etc., since
HTTP transports all message-bodies as payload (see section 3.7.2) and
does not interpret the content or any MIME header lines that might be
RFC 1945 and RFC 2068 document protocol elements used by some
existing HTTP implementations, but not consistently and correctly
across most HTTP/1.1 applications. Implementors are advised to be
aware of these features, but cannot rely upon their presence in, or
interoperability with, other HTTP/1.1 applications. Some of these
describe proposed experimental features, and some describe features
that experimental deployment found lacking that are now addressed in
the base HTTP/1.1 specification.
A number of other headers, such as Content-Disposition and Title,
from SMTP and MIME are also often implemented (see RFC 2076 [37]).
The Content-Disposition response-header field has been proposed as a
means for the origin server to suggest a default filename if the user
requests that the content is saved to a file. This usage is derived
from the definition of Content-Disposition in RFC 1806 [35].
content-disposition = "Content-Disposition" ":"
disposition-type = "attachment" | disp-extension-token
disposition-parm = filename-parm | disp-extension-parm
filename-parm = "filename" "=" quoted-string
disp-extension-token = token
disp-extension-parm = token "=" ( token | quoted-string )
Content-Disposition: attachment; filename="fname.ext"
The receiving user agent SHOULD NOT respect any directory path
information present in the filename-parm parameter, which is the only
parameter believed to apply to HTTP implementations at this time. The
filename SHOULD be treated as a terminal component only.
If this header is used in a response with the application/octet-
stream content-type, the implied suggestion is that the user agent
should not display the response, but directly enter a `save response
See section 15.5 for Content-Disposition security issues.
It is beyond the scope of a protocol specification to mandate
compliance with previous versions. HTTP/1.1 was deliberately
designed, however, to make supporting previous versions easy. It is
worth noting that, at the time of composing this specification
(1996), we would expect commercial HTTP/1.1 servers to:
- recognize the format of the Request-Line for HTTP/0.9, 1.0, and
- understand any valid request in the format of HTTP/0.9, 1.0, or
- respond appropriately with a message in the same major version
And we would expect HTTP/1.1 clients to:
- recognize the format of the Status-Line for HTTP/1.0 and 1.1
- understand any valid response in the format of HTTP/0.9, 1.0, or
For most implementations of HTTP/1.0, each connection is established
by the client prior to the request and closed by the server after
sending the response. Some implementations implement the Keep-Alive
version of persistent connections described in section 19.7.1 of RFC
This section summarizes major differences between versions HTTP/1.0
The requirements that clients and servers support the Host request-
header, report an error if the Host request-header (section 14.23) is
missing from an HTTP/1.1 request, and accept absolute URIs (section
5.1.2) are among the most important changes defined by this
Older HTTP/1.0 clients assumed a one-to-one relationship of IP
addresses and servers; there was no other established mechanism for
distinguishing the intended server of a request than the IP address
to which that request was directed. The changes outlined above will
allow the Internet, once older HTTP clients are no longer common, to
support multiple Web sites from a single IP address, greatly
simplifying large operational Web servers, where allocation of many
IP addresses to a single host has created serious problems. The
Internet will also be able to recover the IP addresses that have been
allocated for the sole purpose of allowing special-purpose domain
names to be used in root-level HTTP URLs. Given the rate of growth of
the Web, and the number of servers already deployed, it is extremely
important that all implementations of HTTP (including updates to
existing HTTP/1.0 applications) correctly implement these
- Both clients and servers MUST support the Host request-header.
- A client that sends an HTTP/1.1 request MUST send a Host header.
- Servers MUST report a 400 (Bad Request) error if an HTTP/1.1
request does not include a Host request-header.
- Servers MUST accept absolute URIs.
Some clients and servers might wish to be compatible with some
previous implementations of persistent connections in HTTP/1.0
clients and servers. Persistent connections in HTTP/1.0 are
explicitly negotiated as they are not the default behavior. HTTP/1.0
experimental implementations of persistent connections are faulty,
and the new facilities in HTTP/1.1 are designed to rectify these
problems. The problem was that some existing 1.0 clients may be
sending Keep-Alive to a proxy server that doesn't understand
Connection, which would then erroneously forward it to the next
inbound server, which would establish the Keep-Alive connection and
result in a hung HTTP/1.0 proxy waiting for the close on the
response. The result is that HTTP/1.0 clients must be prevented from
using Keep-Alive when talking to proxies.
However, talking to proxies is the most important use of persistent
connections, so that prohibition is clearly unacceptable. Therefore,
we need some other mechanism for indicating a persistent connection
is desired, which is safe to use even when talking to an old proxy
that ignores Connection. Persistent connections are the default for
HTTP/1.1 messages; we introduce a new keyword (Connection: close) for
declaring non-persistence. See section 14.10.
The original HTTP/1.0 form of persistent connections (the Connection:
Keep-Alive and Keep-Alive header) is documented in RFC 2068. [33]
This specification has been carefully audited to correct and
disambiguate key word usage; RFC 2068 had many problems in respect to
the conventions laid out in RFC 2119 [34].
Clarified which error code should be used for inbound server failures
CREATE had a race that required an Etag be sent when a resource is
Content-Base was deleted from the specification: it was not
implemented widely, and there is no simple, safe way to introduce it
without a robust extension mechanism. In addition, it is used in a
similar, but not identical fashion in MHTML [45].
Transfer-coding and message lengths all interact in ways that
required fixing exactly when chunked encoding is used (to allow for
transfer encoding that may not be self delimiting); it was important
to straighten out exactly how message lengths are computed. (Sections
A content-coding of "identity" was introduced, to solve problems
discovered in caching. (section 3.5)
Quality Values of zero should indicate that "I don't want something"
to allow clients to refuse a representation. (Section 3.9)
The use and interpretation of HTTP version numbers has been clarified
by RFC 2145. Require proxies to upgrade requests to highest protocol
version they support to deal with problems discovered in HTTP/1.0
implementations (Section 3.1)
Charset wildcarding is introduced to avoid explosion of character set
names in accept headers. (Section 14.2)
A case was missed in the Cache-Control model of HTTP/1.1; s-maxage
was introduced to add this missing case. (Sections 13.4, 14.8, 14.9,
The Cache-Control: max-age directive was not properly defined for
There are situations where a server (especially a proxy) does not
know the full length of a response but is capable of serving a
byterange request. We therefore need a mechanism to allow byteranges
with a content-range not indicating the full length of the message.
Range request responses would become very verbose if all meta-data
were always returned; by allowing the server to only send needed
headers in a 206 response, this problem can be avoided. (Section
Fix problem with unsatisfiable range requests; there are two cases:
syntactic problems, and range doesn't exist in the document. The 416
status code was needed to resolve this ambiguity needed to indicate
an error for a byte range request that falls outside of the actual
Rewrite of message transmission requirements to make it much harder
for implementors to get it wrong, as the consequences of errors here
can have significant impact on the Internet, and to deal with the
this was incorrectly placing a requirement on the behavior of
an implementation of a future version of HTTP/1.x
(Continue) responses, and for proxies to forward 100 responses,
into a general requirement for 1xx responses.
non-TCP transports are possible for HTTP.
body before it sends a required 100 (Continue) response.
it has already seen some of the request body.
This change adds the Expect header and 417 status code. The message
transmission requirements fixes are in sections 8.2, 10.4.18,
Proxies should be able to add Content-Length when appropriate.
Clean up confusion between 403 and 404 responses. (Section 10.4.4,
Warnings could be cached incorrectly, or not updated appropriately.
also needed to be a general header, as PUT or other methods may have
Transfer-coding had significant problems, particularly with
interactions with chunked encoding. The solution is that transfer-
codings become as full fledged as content-codings. This involves
adding an IANA registry for transfer-codings (separate from content
codings), a new header field (TE) and enabling trailer headers in the
future. Transfer encoding is a major performance benefit, so it was
worth fixing [39]. TE also solves another, obscure, downward
interoperability problem that could have occurred due to interactions
between authentication trailers, chunked encoding and HTTP/1.0
The PATCH, LINK, UNLINK methods were defined but not commonly
implemented in previous versions of this specification. See RFC 2068
The Alternates, Content-Version, Derived-From, Link, URI, Public and
Content-Base header fields were defined in previous versions of this
specification, but not commonly implemented. See RFC 2068 [33].
Please see the PostScript version of this RFC for the INDEX.
This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.
This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
"AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
Request for Comments: 4251              SSH Communications Security Corp
The Secure Shell (SSH) Protocol Architecture
Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).
The Secure Shell (SSH) Protocol is a protocol for secure remote login
and other secure network services over an insecure network.  This
document describes the architecture of the SSH protocol, as well as
the notation and terminology used in SSH protocol documents.  It also
discusses the SSH algorithm naming system that allows local
extensions.  The SSH protocol consists of three major components: The
Transport Layer Protocol provides server authentication,
confidentiality, and integrity with perfect forward secrecy.  The
User Authentication Protocol authenticates the client to the server.
The Connection Protocol multiplexes the encrypted tunnel into several
logical channels.  Details of these protocols are described in
Secure Shell (SSH) is a protocol for secure remote login and other
secure network services over an insecure network.  It consists of
three major components:
o  The Transport Layer Protocol [SSH-TRANS] provides server
authentication, confidentiality, and integrity.  It may optionally
also provide compression.  The transport layer will typically be
run over a TCP/IP connection, but might also be used on top of any
other reliable data stream.
o  The User Authentication Protocol [SSH-USERAUTH] authenticates the
client-side user to the server.  It runs over the transport layer
o  The Connection Protocol [SSH-CONNECT] multiplexes the encrypted
tunnel into several logical channels.  It runs over the user
authentication protocol.
The client sends a service request once a secure transport layer
connection has been established.  A second service request is sent
after user authentication is complete.  This allows new protocols to
be defined and coexist with the protocols listed above.
The connection protocol provides channels that can be used for a wide
range of purposes.  Standard methods are provided for setting up
secure interactive shell sessions and for forwarding ("tunneling")
arbitrary TCP/IP ports and X11 connections.
The major original contributors of this set of documents have been:
Tatu Ylonen, Tero Kivinen, Timo J. Rinne, Sami Lehtinen (all of SSH
Communications Security Corp), and Markku-Juhani O. Saarinen
(University of Jyvaskyla).  Darren Moffat was the original editor of
this set of documents and also made very substantial contributions.
Many people contributed to the development of this document over the
years.  People who should be acknowledged include Mats Andersson, Ben
Harris, Bill Sommerfeld, Brent McClure, Niels Moller, Damien Miller,
Derek Fawcus, Frank Cusack, Heikki Nousiainen, Jakob Schlyter, Jeff
Van Dyke, Jeffrey Altman, Jeffrey Hutzelman, Jon Bright, Joseph
Galbraith, Ken Hornstein, Markus Friedl, Martin Forssen, Nicolas
Williams, Niels Provos, Perry Metzger, Peter Gutmann, Simon
Josefsson, Simon Tatham, Wei Dai, Denis Bider, der Mouse, and
Tadayoshi Kohno.  Listing their names here does not mean that they
endorse this document, but that they have contributed to it.
All documents related to the SSH protocols shall use the keywords
"MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" to describe
requirements.  These keywords are to be interpreted as described in
The keywords "PRIVATE USE", "HIERARCHICAL ALLOCATION", "FIRST COME
FIRST SERVED", "EXPERT REVIEW", "SPECIFICATION REQUIRED", "IESG
APPROVAL", "IETF CONSENSUS", and "STANDARDS ACTION" that appear in
this document when used to describe namespace allocation are to be
interpreted as described in [RFC2434].
Protocol fields and possible values to fill them are defined in this
set of documents.  Protocol fields will be defined in the message
definitions.  As an example, SSH_MSG_CHANNEL_DATA is defined as
byte      SSH_MSG_CHANNEL_DATA
uint32    recipient channel
Throughout these documents, when the fields are referenced, they will
appear within single quotes.  When values to fill those fields are
referenced, they will appear within double quotes.  Using the above
example, possible values for 'data' are "foo" and "bar".
Each server host SHOULD have a host key.  Hosts MAY have multiple
host keys using multiple different algorithms.  Multiple hosts MAY
share the same host key.  If a host has keys at all, it MUST have at
least one key that uses each REQUIRED public key algorithm (DSS
The server host key is used during key exchange to verify that the
client is really talking to the correct server.  For this to be
possible, the client must have a priori knowledge of the server's
Two different trust models can be used:
o  The client has a local database that associates each host name (as
typed by the user) with the corresponding public host key.  This
method requires no centrally administered infrastructure, and no
third-party coordination.  The downside is that the database of
name-to-key associations may become burdensome to maintain.
o  The host name-to-key association is certified by a trusted
certification authority (CA).  The client only knows the CA root
key, and can verify the validity of all host keys certified by
The second alternative eases the maintenance problem, since ideally
only a single CA key needs to be securely stored on the client.  On
the other hand, each host key must be appropriately certified by a
central authority before authorization is possible.  Also, a lot of
trust is placed on the central infrastructure.
The protocol provides the option that the server name - host key
association is not checked when connecting to the host for the first
time.  This allows communication without prior communication of host
keys or certification.  The connection still provides protection
against passive listening; however, it becomes vulnerable to active
man-in-the-middle attacks.  Implementations SHOULD NOT normally allow
such connections by default, as they pose a potential security
problem.  However, as there is no widely deployed key infrastructure
available on the Internet at the time of this writing, this option
makes the protocol much more usable during the transition time until
such an infrastructure emerges, while still providing a much higher
level of security than that offered by older solutions (e.g., telnet
Implementations SHOULD try to make the best effort to check host
keys.  An example of a possible strategy is to only accept a host key
without checking the first time a host is connected, save the key in
a local database, and compare against that key on all future
connections to that host.
Implementations MAY provide additional methods for verifying the
correctness of host keys, e.g., a hexadecimal fingerprint derived
from the SHA-1 hash [FIPS-180-2] of the public key.  Such
fingerprints can easily be verified by using telephone or other
external communication channels.
All implementations SHOULD provide an option not to accept host keys
that cannot be verified.
The members of this Working Group believe that 'ease of use' is
critical to end-user acceptance of security solutions, and no
improvement in security is gained if the new solutions are not used.
Thus, providing the option not to check the server host key is
believed to improve the overall security of the Internet, even though
it reduces the security of the protocol in configurations where it is
We believe that the protocol will evolve over time, and some
organizations will want to use their own encryption, authentication,
and/or key exchange methods.  Central registration of all extensions
is cumbersome, especially for experimental or classified features.
On the other hand, having no central registration leads to conflicts
in method identifiers, making interoperability difficult.
We have chosen to identify algorithms, methods, formats, and
extension protocols with textual names that are of a specific format.
DNS names are used to create local namespaces where experimental or
classified extensions can be defined without fear of conflicts with
other implementations.
One design goal has been to keep the base protocol as simple as
possible, and to require as few algorithms as possible.  However, all
implementations MUST support a minimal set of algorithms to ensure
interoperability (this does not imply that the local policy on all
hosts would necessarily allow these algorithms).  The mandatory
algorithms are specified in the relevant protocol documents.
Additional algorithms, methods, formats, and extension protocols can
be defined in separate documents.  See Section 6, Algorithm Naming,
The protocol allows full negotiation of encryption, integrity, key
exchange, compression, and public key algorithms and formats.
Encryption, integrity, public key, and compression algorithms can be
different for each direction.
The following policy issues SHOULD be addressed in the configuration
mechanisms of each implementation:
o  Encryption, integrity, and compression algorithms, separately for
each direction.  The policy MUST specify which is the preferred
algorithm (e.g., the first algorithm listed in each category).
o  Public key algorithms and key exchange method to be used for host
authentication.  The existence of trusted host keys for different
public key algorithms also affects this choice.
o  The authentication methods that are to be required by the server
for each user.  The server's policy MAY require multiple
authentication for some or all users.  The required algorithms MAY
depend on the location from where the user is trying to gain
o  The operations that the user is allowed to perform using the
connection protocol.  Some issues are related to security; for
example, the policy SHOULD NOT allow the server to start sessions
or run commands on the client machine, and MUST NOT allow
connections to the authentication agent unless forwarding such
connections has been requested.  Other issues, such as which
TCP/IP ports can be forwarded and by whom, are clearly issues of
local policy.  Many of these issues may involve traversing or
bypassing firewalls, and are interrelated with the local security
The primary goal of the SSH protocol is to improve security on the
Internet.  It attempts to do this in a way that is easy to deploy,
even at the cost of absolute security.
o  All encryption, integrity, and public key algorithms used are
well-known, well-established algorithms.
o  All algorithms are used with cryptographically sound key sizes
that are believed to provide protection against even the strongest
cryptanalytic attacks for decades.
o  All algorithms are negotiated, and in case some algorithm is
broken, it is easy to switch to some other algorithm without
modifying the base protocol.
Specific concessions were made to make widespread, fast deployment
easier.  The particular case where this comes up is verifying that
the server host key really belongs to the desired host; the protocol
allows the verification to be left out, but this is NOT RECOMMENDED.
This is believed to significantly improve usability in the short
term, until widespread Internet public key infrastructures emerge.
For the most part, the SSH protocols do not directly pass text that
would be displayed to the user.  However, there are some places where
such data might be passed.  When applicable, the character set for
the data MUST be explicitly specified.  In most places, ISO-10646
UTF-8 encoding is used [RFC3629].  When applicable, a field is also
provided for a language tag [RFC3066].
One big issue is the character set of the interactive session.  There
is no clear solution, as different applications may display data in
different formats.  Different types of terminal emulation may also be
employed in the client, and the character set to be used is
effectively determined by the terminal emulation.  Thus, no place is
provided for directly specifying the character set or encoding for
terminal session data.  However, the terminal emulation type (e.g.,
"vt100") is transmitted to the remote site, and it implicitly
specifies the character set and encoding.  Applications typically use
the terminal type to determine what character set they use, or the
character set is determined using some external means.  The terminal
emulation may also allow configuring the default character set.  In
any case, the character set for the terminal session is considered
primarily a client local issue.
Internal names used to identify algorithms or protocols are normally
never displayed to users, and must be in US-ASCII.
The client and server user names are inherently constrained by what
the server is prepared to accept.  They might, however, occasionally
be displayed in logs, reports, etc.  They MUST be encoded using ISO
is up to the server to decide how to map user names to accepted user
names.  Straight bit-wise, binary comparison is RECOMMENDED.
For localization purposes, the protocol attempts to minimize the
number of textual messages transmitted.  When present, such messages
typically relate to errors, debugging information, or some externally
configured data.  For data that is normally displayed, it SHOULD be
possible to fetch a localized message instead of the transmitted
message by using a numerical code.  The remaining messages SHOULD be
A byte represents an arbitrary 8-bit value (octet).  Fixed length
data is sometimes represented as an array of bytes, written
byte[n], where n is the number of bytes in the array.
A boolean value is stored as a single byte.  The value 0
represents FALSE, and the value 1 represents TRUE.  All non-zero
values MUST be interpreted as TRUE; however, applications MUST NOT
store values other than 0 and 1.
Represents a 32-bit unsigned integer.  Stored as four bytes in the
order of decreasing significance (network byte order).  For
Represents a 64-bit unsigned integer.  Stored as eight bytes in
the order of decreasing significance (network byte order).
Arbitrary length binary string.  Strings are allowed to contain
arbitrary binary data, including null characters and 8-bit
characters.  They are stored as a uint32 containing its length
(number of bytes that follow) and zero (= empty string) or more
bytes that are the value of the string.  Terminating null
characters are not used.
Strings are also used to store text.  In that case, US-ASCII is
used for internal names, and ISO-10646 UTF-8 for text that might
be displayed to the user.  The terminating null character SHOULD
NOT normally be stored in the string.  For example: the US-ASCII
UTF-8 mapping does not alter the encoding of US-ASCII characters.
Represents multiple precision integers in two's complement format,
stored as a string, 8 bits per byte, MSB first.  Negative numbers
have the value 1 as the most significant bit of the first byte of
the data partition.  If the most significant bit would be set for
a positive number, the number MUST be preceded by a zero byte.
Unnecessary leading bytes with the value 0 or 255 MUST NOT be
included.  The value zero MUST be stored as a string with zero
By convention, a number that is used in modular computations in
Z_n SHOULD be represented in the range 0 <= x < n.
A string containing a comma-separated list of names.  A name-list
is represented as a uint32 containing its length (number of bytes
that follow) followed by a comma-separated list of zero or more
names.  A name MUST have a non-zero length, and it MUST NOT
contain a comma (",").  As this is a list of names, all of the
elements contained are names and MUST be in US-ASCII.  Context may
impose additional restrictions on the names.  For example, the
names in a name-list may have to be a list of valid algorithm
identifiers (see Section 6 below), or a list of [RFC3066] language
tags.  The order of the names in a name-list may or may not be
significant.  Again, this depends on the context in which the list
is used.  Terminating null characters MUST NOT be used, neither
for the individual names, nor for the list as a whole.
The SSH protocols refer to particular hash, encryption, integrity,
compression, and key exchange algorithms or methods by name.  There
are some standard algorithms and methods that all implementations
MUST support.  There are also algorithms and methods that are defined
in the protocol specification, but are OPTIONAL.  Furthermore, it is
expected that some organizations will want to use their own
In this protocol, all algorithm and method identifiers MUST be
printable US-ASCII, non-empty strings no longer than 64 characters.
Names MUST be case-sensitive.
There are two formats for algorithm and method names:
o  Names that do not contain an at-sign ("@") are reserved to be
assigned by IETF CONSENSUS.  Examples include "3des-cbc", "sha-1",
"hmac-sha1", and "zlib" (the doublequotes are not part of the
name).  Names of this format are only valid if they are first
registered with the IANA.  Registered names MUST NOT contain an
at-sign ("@"), comma (","), whitespace, control characters (ASCII
codes 32 or less), or the ASCII code 127 (DEL).  Names are case-
sensitive, and MUST NOT be longer than 64 characters.
o  Anyone can define additional algorithms or methods by using names
in the format name@domainname, e.g., "ourcipher-cbc@example.com".
The format of the part preceding the at-sign is not specified;
however, these names MUST be printable US-ASCII strings, and MUST
NOT contain the comma character (","), whitespace, control
characters (ASCII codes 32 or less), or the ASCII code 127 (DEL).
They MUST have only a single at-sign in them.  The part following
the at-sign MUST be a valid, fully qualified domain name [RFC1034]
controlled by the person or organization defining the name.  Names
are case-sensitive, and MUST NOT be longer than 64 characters.  It
is up to each domain how it manages its local namespace.  It
should be noted that these names resemble STD 11 [RFC0822] email
addresses.  This is purely coincidental and has nothing to do with
SSH packets have message numbers in the range 1 to 255.  These
numbers have been allocated as follows:
Transport layer protocol:
for different authentication methods)
User authentication protocol:
reused for different authentication methods)
Reserved for client protocols:
This document is part of a set.  The instructions for the IANA for
the SSH protocol, as defined in this document, [SSH-USERAUTH],
[SSH-TRANS], and [SSH-CONNECT], are detailed in [SSH-NUMBERS].  The
following is a brief summary for convenience, but note well that
[SSH-NUMBERS] contains the actual instructions to the IANA, which may
be superseded in the future.
Allocation of the following types of names in the SSH protocols is
assigned by IETF consensus:
*  Authentication Methods
*  Connection Protocol Channel Names
*  Connection Protocol Global Request Names
*  Connection Protocol Channel Request Names
o  Key Exchange Method Names
o  Assigned Algorithm Names
*  Encryption Algorithm Names
*  Public Key Algorithm Names
*  Compression Algorithm Names
These names MUST be printable US-ASCII strings, and MUST NOT contain
the characters at-sign ("@"), comma (","), whitespace, control
Names are case-sensitive, and MUST NOT be longer than 64 characters.
Names with the at-sign ("@") are locally defined extensions and are
not controlled by the IANA.
Each category of names listed above has a separate namespace.
However, using the same name in multiple categories SHOULD be avoided
Message numbers (see Section 7) in the range of 0 to 191 are
allocated via IETF CONSENSUS, as described in [RFC2434].  Message
numbers in the 192 to 255 range (local extensions) are reserved for
PRIVATE USE, also as described in [RFC2434].
In order to make the entire body of Security Considerations more
accessible, Security Considerations for the transport,
authentication, and connection documents have been gathered here.
The transport protocol [SSH-TRANS] provides a confidential channel
over an insecure network.  It performs server host authentication,
key exchange, encryption, and integrity protection.  It also derives
a unique session id that may be used by higher-level protocols.
The authentication protocol [SSH-USERAUTH] provides a suite of
mechanisms that can be used to authenticate the client user to the
server.  Individual mechanisms specified in the authentication
protocol use the session id provided by the transport protocol and/or
depend on the security and integrity guarantees of the transport
The connection protocol [SSH-CONNECT] specifies a mechanism to
multiplex multiple streams (channels) of data over the confidential
and authenticated transport.  It also specifies channels for
accessing an interactive shell, for proxy-forwarding various external
protocols over the secure transport (including arbitrary TCP/IP
protocols), and for accessing secure subsystems on the server host.
This protocol binds each session key to the session by including
random, session specific data in the hash used to produce session
keys.  Special care should be taken to ensure that all of the random
numbers are of good quality.  If the random data here (e.g., Diffie-
Hellman (DH) parameters) are pseudo-random, then the pseudo-random
number generator should be cryptographically secure (i.e., its next
output not easily guessed even when knowing all previous outputs)
and, furthermore, proper entropy needs to be added to the pseudo-
random number generator.  [RFC4086] offers suggestions for sources of
random numbers and entropy.  Implementers should note the importance
of entropy and the well-meant, anecdotal warning about the difficulty
in properly implementing pseudo-random number generating functions.
The amount of entropy available to a given client or server may
sometimes be less than what is required.  In this case, one must
either resort to pseudo-random number generation regardless of
insufficient entropy or refuse to run the protocol.  The latter is
When displaying text to a user, such as error or debug messages, the
client software SHOULD replace any control characters (except tab,
carriage return, and newline) with safe sequences to avoid attacks by
sending terminal control characters.
It is beyond the scope of this document and the Secure Shell Working
Group to analyze or recommend specific ciphers other than the ones
that have been established and accepted within the industry.  At the
time of this writing, commonly used ciphers include 3DES, ARCFOUR,
twofish, serpent, and blowfish.  AES has been published by The US
Federal Information Processing Standards as [FIPS-197], and the
cryptographic community has accepted AES as well.  As always,
implementers and users should check current literature to ensure that
no recent vulnerabilities have been found in ciphers used within
products.  Implementers should also check to see which ciphers are
considered to be relatively stronger than others and should recommend
their use to users over relatively weaker ciphers.  It would be
considered good form for an implementation to politely and
unobtrusively notify a user that a stronger cipher is available and
should be used when a weaker one is actively chosen.
The "none" cipher is provided for debugging and SHOULD NOT be used
except for that purpose.  Its cryptographic properties are
sufficiently described in [RFC2410], which will show that its use
does not meet the intent of this protocol.
The relative merits of these and other ciphers may also be found in
current literature.  Two references that may provide information on
the subject are [SCHNEIER] and [KAUFMAN].  Both of these describe the
CBC mode of operation of certain ciphers and the weakness of this
scheme.  Essentially, this mode is theoretically vulnerable to chosen
cipher-text attacks because of the high predictability of the start
of packet sequence.  However, this attack is deemed difficult and not
considered fully practicable, especially if relatively long block
Additionally, another CBC mode attack may be mitigated through the
insertion of packets containing SSH_MSG_IGNORE.  Without this
technique, a specific attack may be successful.  For this attack
(commonly known as the Rogaway attack [ROGAWAY], [DAI], [BELLARE]) to
work, the attacker would need to know the Initialization Vector (IV)
of the next block that is going to be encrypted.  In CBC mode that is
the output of the encryption of the previous block.  If the attacker
does not have any way to see the packet yet (i.e., it is in the
internal buffers of the SSH implementation or even in the kernel),
then this attack will not work.  If the last packet has been sent out
to the network (i.e., the attacker has access to it), then he can use
In the optimal case, an implementer would need to add an extra packet
only if the packet has been sent out onto the network and there are
no other packets waiting for transmission.  Implementers may wish to
check if there are any unsent packets awaiting transmission;
unfortunately, it is not normally easy to obtain this information
from the kernel or buffers.  If there are no unsent packets, then a
packet containing SSH_MSG_IGNORE SHOULD be sent.  If a new packet is
added to the stream every time the attacker knows the IV that is
supposed to be used for the next packet, then the attacker will not
be able to guess the correct IV, thus the attack will never be
As an example, consider the following case:
get coalesced into a single TCP segment.
be because it gets ACKed.
As this example indicates, it is unsafe to use the existence of
unflushed data in the TCP buffers proper as a guide to whether an
empty packet is needed, since when the second write() is performed
the buffers will contain the un-ACKed Record 1.
On the other hand, it is perfectly safe to have the following
contains SSH_MSG_IGNORE
Provided that the IV for the second SSH Record is fixed after the
data for the Data packet is determined, then the following should
This protocol does allow the Data Integrity mechanism to be disabled.
Implementers SHOULD be wary of exposing this feature for any purpose
other than debugging.  Users and administrators SHOULD be explicitly
warned anytime the "none" MAC is enabled.
So long as the "none" MAC is not used, this protocol provides data
Because MACs use a 32-bit sequence number, they might start to leak
information after 2**32 packets have been sent.  However, following
the rekeying recommendations should prevent this attack.  The
transport protocol [SSH-TRANS] recommends rekeying after one gigabyte
of data, and the smallest possible packet is 16 bytes.  Therefore,
rekeying SHOULD happen after 2**28 packets at the very most.
The use of a MAC other than "none" provides integrity and
authentication.  In addition, the transport protocol provides a
unique session identifier (bound in part to pseudo-random data that
is part of the algorithm and key exchange process) that can be used
by higher level protocols to bind data to a given session and prevent
replay of data from prior sessions.  For example, the authentication
protocol ([SSH-USERAUTH]) uses this to prevent replay of signatures
from previous sessions.  Because public key authentication exchanges
are cryptographically bound to the session (i.e., to the initial key
exchange), they cannot be successfully replayed in other sessions.
Note that the session id can be made public without harming the
security of the protocol.
If two sessions have the same session id (hash of key exchanges),
then packets from one can be replayed against the other.  It must be
stressed that the chances of such an occurrence are, needless to say,
minimal when using modern cryptographic methods.  This is all the
more true when specifying larger hash function outputs and DH
Replay detection using monotonically increasing sequence numbers as
input to the MAC, or HMAC in some cases, is described in [RFC2085],
underlying construct is discussed in [RFC2104].  Essentially, a
different sequence number in each packet ensures that at least this
one input to the MAC function will be unique and will provide a
nonrecurring MAC output that is not predictable to an attacker.  If
the session stays active long enough, however, this sequence number
will wrap.  This event may provide an attacker an opportunity to
replay a previously recorded packet with an identical sequence number
but only if the peers have not rekeyed since the transmission of the
first packet with that sequence number.  If the peers have rekeyed,
then the replay will be detected since the MAC check will fail.  For
this reason, it must be emphasized that peers MUST rekey before a
wrap of the sequence numbers.  Naturally, if an attacker does attempt
to replay a captured packet before the peers have rekeyed, then the
receiver of the duplicate packet will not be able to validate the MAC
and it will be discarded.  The reason that the MAC will fail is
because the receiver will formulate a MAC based upon the packet
contents, the shared secret, and the expected sequence number.  Since
the replayed packet will not be using that expected sequence number
(the sequence number of the replayed packet will have already been
passed by the receiver), the calculated MAC will not match the MAC
received with the packet.
This protocol makes no assumptions or provisions for an
infrastructure or means for distributing the public keys of hosts.
It is expected that this protocol will sometimes be used without
first verifying the association between the server host key and the
server host name.  Such usage is vulnerable to man-in-the-middle
attacks.  This section describes this and encourages administrators
and users to understand the importance of verifying this association
before any session is initiated.
There are three cases of man-in-the-middle attacks to consider.  The
first is where an attacker places a device between the client and the
server before the session is initiated.  In this case, the attack
device is trying to mimic the legitimate server and will offer its
public key to the client when the client initiates a session.  If it
were to offer the public key of the server, then it would not be able
to decrypt or sign the transmissions between the legitimate server
and the client unless it also had access to the private key of the
host.  The attack device will also, simultaneously to this, initiate
a session to the legitimate server, masquerading itself as the
client.  If the public key of the server had been securely
distributed to the client prior to that session initiation, the key
offered to the client by the attack device will not match the key
stored on the client.  In that case, the user SHOULD be given a
warning that the offered host key does not match the host key cached
on the client.  As described in Section 4.1, the user may be free to
accept the new key and continue the session.  It is RECOMMENDED that
the warning provide sufficient information to the user of the client
device so the user may make an informed decision.  If the user
chooses to continue the session with the stored public key of the
server (not the public key offered at the start of the session), then
the session-specific data between the attacker and server will be
different between the client-to-attacker session and the attacker-
to-server sessions due to the randomness discussed above.  From this,
the attacker will not be able to make this attack work since the
attacker will not be able to correctly sign packets containing this
session-specific data from the server, since he does not have the
private key of that server.
The second case that should be considered is similar to the first
case in that it also happens at the time of connection, but this case
points out the need for the secure distribution of server public
keys.  If the server public keys are not securely distributed, then
the client cannot know if it is talking to the intended server.  An
attacker may use social engineering techniques to pass off server
keys to unsuspecting users and may then place a man-in-the-middle
attack device between the legitimate server and the clients.  If this
is allowed to happen, then the clients will form client-to-attacker
sessions, and the attacker will form attacker-to-server sessions and
will be able to monitor and manipulate all of the traffic between the
clients and the legitimate servers.  Server administrators are
encouraged to make host key fingerprints available for checking by
some means whose security does not rely on the integrity of the
actual host keys.  Possible mechanisms are discussed in Section 4.1
and may also include secured Web pages, physical pieces of paper,
etc.  Implementers SHOULD provide recommendations on how best to do
this with their implementation.  Because the protocol is extensible,
future extensions to the protocol may provide better mechanisms for
dealing with the need to know the server's host key before
connecting.  For example, making the host key fingerprint available
through a secure DNS lookup, or using Kerberos ([RFC4120]) over
GSS-API ([RFC1964]) during key exchange to authenticate the server
In the third man-in-the-middle case, attackers may attempt to
manipulate packets in transit between peers after the session has
been established.  As described in Section 9.3.3, a successful attack
of this nature is very improbable.  As in Section 9.3.3, this
reasoning does assume that the MAC is secure and that it is
infeasible to construct inputs to a MAC algorithm to give a known
output.  This is discussed in much greater detail in Section 6 of
[RFC2104].  If the MAC algorithm has a vulnerability or is weak
enough, then the attacker may be able to specify certain inputs to
yield a known MAC.  With that, they may be able to alter the contents
of a packet in transit.  Alternatively, the attacker may be able to
exploit the algorithm vulnerability or weakness to find the shared
secret by reviewing the MACs from captured packets.  In either of
those cases, an attacker could construct a packet or packets that
could be inserted into an SSH stream.  To prevent this, implementers
are encouraged to utilize commonly accepted MAC algorithms, and
administrators are encouraged to watch current literature and
discussions of cryptography to ensure that they are not using a MAC
algorithm that has a recently found vulnerability or weakness.
In summary, the use of this protocol without a reliable association
of the binding between a host and its host keys is inherently
insecure and is NOT RECOMMENDED.  However, it may be necessary in
non-security-critical environments, and will still provide protection
against passive attacks.  Implementers of protocols and applications
running on top of this protocol should keep this possibility in mind.
This protocol is designed to be used over a reliable transport.  If
transmission errors or message manipulation occur, the connection is
closed.  The connection SHOULD be re-established if this occurs.
Denial of service attacks of this type (wire cutter) are almost
In addition, this protocol is vulnerable to denial of service attacks
because an attacker can force the server to go through the CPU and
memory intensive tasks of connection setup and key exchange without
authenticating.  Implementers SHOULD provide features that make this
more difficult, for example, only allowing connections from a subset
of clients known to have valid users.
The protocol was not designed to eliminate covert channels.  For
example, the padding, SSH_MSG_IGNORE messages, and several other
places in the protocol can be used to pass covert information, and
the recipient has no reliable way of verifying whether such
information is being sent.
It should be noted that the Diffie-Hellman key exchanges may provide
perfect forward secrecy (PFS).  PFS is essentially defined as the
cryptographic property of a key-establishment protocol in which the
compromise of a session key or long-term private key after a given
session does not cause the compromise of any earlier session
[ANSI-T1.523-2001].  SSH sessions resulting from a key exchange using
the diffie-hellman methods described in the section Diffie-Hellman
Key Exchange of [SSH-TRANS] (including "diffie-hellman-group1-sha1"
and "diffie-hellman-group14-sha1") are secure even if private
keying/authentication material is later revealed, but not if the
session keys are revealed.  So, given this definition of PFS, SSH
does have PFS.  However, this property is not commuted to any of the
applications or protocols using SSH as a transport.  The transport
layer of SSH provides confidentiality for password authentication and
other methods that rely on secret data.
Of course, if the DH private parameters for the client and server are
revealed, then the session key is revealed, but these items can be
thrown away after the key exchange completes.  It's worth pointing
out that these items should not be allowed to end up on swap space
and that they should be erased from memory as soon as the key
As stated in the section on Algorithm Negotiation of [SSH-TRANS],
each device will send a list of preferred methods for key exchange.
The most-preferred method is the first in the list.  It is
RECOMMENDED that the algorithms be sorted by cryptographic strength,
strongest first.  Some additional guidance for this is given in
Passive monitoring of any protocol may give an attacker some
information about the session, the user, or protocol specific
information that they would otherwise not be able to garner.  For
example, it has been shown that traffic analysis of an SSH session
can yield information about the length of the password - [Openwall]
and [USENIX].  Implementers should use the SSH_MSG_IGNORE packet,
along with the inclusion of random lengths of padding, to thwart
attempts at traffic analysis.  Other methods may also be found and
The purpose of this protocol is to perform client user
authentication.  It assumes that this runs over a secure transport
layer protocol, which has already authenticated the server machine,
established an encrypted communications channel, and computed a
unique session identifier for this session.
Several authentication methods with different security
characteristics are allowed.  It is up to the server's local policy
to decide which methods (or combinations of methods) it is willing to
accept for each user.  Authentication is no stronger than the weakest
The server may go into a sleep period after repeated unsuccessful
authentication attempts to make key search more difficult for
attackers.  Care should be taken so that this doesn't become a self-
denial of service vector.
If the transport layer does not provide confidentiality,
authentication methods that rely on secret data SHOULD be disabled.
If it does not provide strong integrity protection, requests to
change authentication data (e.g., a password change) SHOULD be
disabled to prevent an attacker from modifying the ciphertext without
being noticed, or rendering the new authentication data unusable
The assumption stated above, that the Authentication Protocol only
runs over a secure transport that has previously authenticated the
server, is very important to note.  People deploying SSH are reminded
of the consequences of man-in-the-middle attacks if the client does
not have a very strong a priori association of the server with the
host key of that server.  Specifically, for the case of the
Authentication Protocol, the client may form a session to a man-in-
the-middle attack device and divulge user credentials such as their
username and password.  Even in the cases of authentication where no
user credentials are divulged, an attacker may still gain information
they shouldn't have by capturing key-strokes in much the same way
Special care should be taken when designing debug messages.  These
messages may reveal surprising amounts of information about the host
if not properly designed.  Debug messages can be disabled (during
user authentication phase) if high security is required.
Administrators of host machines should make all attempts to
compartmentalize all event notification messages and protect them
from unwarranted observation.  Developers should be aware of the
sensitive nature of some of the normal event and debug messages, and
may want to provide guidance to administrators on ways to keep this
information away from unauthorized people.  Developers should
consider minimizing the amount of sensitive information obtainable by
users during the authentication phase, in accordance with the local
policies.  For this reason, it is RECOMMENDED that debug messages be
initially disabled at the time of deployment and require an active
decision by an administrator to allow them to be enabled.  It is also
RECOMMENDED that a message expressing this concern be presented to
the administrator of a system when the action is taken to enable
The implementer MUST ensure that the credentials provided validate
the professed user and also MUST ensure that the local policy of the
server permits the user the access requested.  In particular, because
of the flexible nature of the SSH connection protocol, it may not be
possible to determine the local security policy, if any, that should
apply at the time of authentication because the kind of service being
requested is not clear at that instant.  For example, local policy
might allow a user to access files on the server, but not start an
interactive shell.  However, during the authentication protocol, it
is not known whether the user will be accessing files, attempting to
use an interactive shell, or even both.  In any event, where local
security policy for the server host exists, it MUST be applied and
Implementers are encouraged to provide a default local policy and
make its parameters known to administrators and users.  At the
discretion of the implementers, this default policy may be along the
lines of anything-goes where there are no restrictions placed upon
users, or it may be along the lines of excessively-restrictive, in
which case, the administrators will have to actively make changes to
the initial default parameters to meet their needs.  Alternatively,
it may be some attempt at providing something practical and
immediately useful to the administrators of the system so they don't
have to put in much effort to get SSH working.  Whatever choice is
made must be applied and enforced as required above.
The use of public key authentication assumes that the client host has
not been compromised.  It also assumes that the private key of the
server host has not been compromised.
This risk can be mitigated by the use of passphrases on private keys;
however, this is not an enforceable policy.  The use of smartcards,
or other technology to make passphrases an enforceable policy is
The server could require both password and public key authentication;
however, this requires the client to expose its password to the
server (see the section on Password Authentication below.)
The password mechanism, as specified in the authentication protocol,
assumes that the server has not been compromised.  If the server has
been compromised, using password authentication will reveal a valid
username/password combination to the attacker, which may lead to
This vulnerability can be mitigated by using an alternative form of
authentication.  For example, public key authentication makes no
assumptions about security on the server.
Host-based authentication assumes that the client has not been
compromised.  There are no mitigating strategies, other than to use
host-based authentication in combination with another authentication
End point security is assumed by the connection protocol.  If the
server has been compromised, any terminal sessions, port forwarding,
or systems accessed on the host are compromised.  There are no
mitigating factors for this.
If the client has been compromised, and the server fails to stop the
attacker at the authentication protocol, all services exposed (either
as subsystems or through forwarding) will be vulnerable to attack.
Implementers SHOULD provide mechanisms for administrators to control
which services are exposed to limit the vulnerability of other
services.  These controls might include controlling which machines
and ports can be targeted in port-forwarding operations, which users
are allowed to use interactive shell facilities, or which users are
allowed to use exposed subsystems.
The SSH connection protocol allows for proxy forwarding of other
protocols such as SMTP, POP3, and HTTP.  This may be a concern for
network administrators who wish to control the access of certain
applications by users located outside of their physical location.
Essentially, the forwarding of these protocols may violate site-
specific security policies, as they may be undetectably tunneled
through a firewall.  Implementers SHOULD provide an administrative
mechanism to control the proxy forwarding functionality so that
site-specific security policies may be upheld.
In addition, a reverse proxy forwarding functionality is available,
which, again, can be used to bypass firewall controls.
As indicated above, end-point security is assumed during proxy
forwarding operations.  Failure of end-point security will compromise
all data passed over proxy forwarding.
Another form of proxy forwarding provided by the SSH connection
protocol is the forwarding of the X11 protocol.  If end-point
security has been compromised, X11 forwarding may allow attacks
against the X11 server.  Users and administrators should, as a matter
of course, use appropriate X11 security mechanisms to prevent
unauthorized use of the X11 server.  Implementers, administrators,
and users who wish to further explore the security mechanisms of X11
are invited to read [SCHEIFLER] and analyze previously reported
problems with the interactions between SSH forwarding and X11 in CERT
X11 display forwarding with SSH, by itself, is not sufficient to
correct well known problems with X11 security [VENEMA].  However, X11
display forwarding in SSH (or other secure protocols), combined with
actual and pseudo-displays that accept connections only over local
IPC mechanisms authorized by permissions or access control lists
(ACLs), does correct many X11 security problems, as long as the
"none" MAC is not used.  It is RECOMMENDED that X11 display
implementations default to allow the display to open only over local
IPC.  It is RECOMMENDED that SSH server implementations that support
X11 forwarding default to allow the display to open only over local
IPC.  On single-user systems, it might be reasonable to default to
allow the local display to open over TCP/IP.
Implementers of the X11 forwarding protocol SHOULD implement the
magic cookie access-checking spoofing mechanism, as described in
[SSH-CONNECT], as an additional mechanism to prevent unauthorized use
[SSH-TRANS]        Ylonen, T. and C. Lonvick, Ed., "The Secure Shell
[SSH-USERAUTH]     Ylonen, T. and C. Lonvick, Ed., "The Secure Shell
[SSH-CONNECT]      Ylonen, T. and C. Lonvick, Ed., "The Secure Shell
[SSH-NUMBERS]      Lehtinen, S. and C. Lonvick, Ed., "The Secure
[RFC2434]          Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for
Writing an IANA Considerations Section in RFCs",
[RFC3066]          Alvestrand, H., "Tags for the Identification of
[RFC0822]          Crocker, D., "Standard for the format of ARPA
[RFC1034]          Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - concepts and
"The Kerberos Network Authentication Service
Keyed-Hashing for Message Authentication", RFC
[RFC2246]          Dierks, T. and C. Allen, "The TLS Protocol Version
[RFC2743]          Linn, J., "Generic Security Service Application
[RFC3766]          Orman, H. and P. Hoffman, "Determining Strengths
For Public Keys Used For Exchanging Symmetric
[FIPS-180-2]       US National Institute of Standards and Technology,
[FIPS-186-2]       US National Institute of Standards and Technology,
Information Processing Standards Publication 186-
[FIPS-197]         US National Institute of Standards and Technology,
Information Processing Standards Publication 197,
[ANSI-T1.523-2001] American National Standards Institute, Inc.,
[SCHNEIER]         Schneier, B., "Applied Cryptography Second
Edition:  protocols algorithms and source in code
[SCHEIFLER]        Scheifler, R., "X Window System : The Complete
"Network Security: PRIVATE Communication in a
[VENEMA]           Venema, W., "Murphy's Law and Computer Security",
Proceedings of 6th USENIX Security Symposium, San
[ROGAWAY]          Rogaway, P., "Problems with Proposed IP
to the SECSH Working Group ietf-ssh@netbsd.org
[BELLARE]          Bellaire, M., Kohno, T., and C. Namprempre,
"Authenticated Encryption in SSH: Fixing the SSH
Binary Packet Protocol", Proceedings of the 9th
ACM Conference on Computer and Communications
[Openwall]         Solar Designer and D. Song, "SSH Traffic Analysis
Analysis of Keystrokes and SSH Timing Attacks",
SSH Communications Security Corp
EMail: clonvick@cisco.com
"ssh" is a registered trademark in the United States and/or other
Full Copyright Statement
This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
retain all their rights.
This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
"AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
Intellectual Property
The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
Administrative Support Activity (IASA).
Category: Standards Track
This document is a specification of the basic protocol for Internet
electronic mail transport.  It consolidates, updates, and clarifies
several previous documents, making all or parts of most of them
obsolete.  It covers the SMTP extension mechanisms and best practices
for the contemporary Internet, but does not provide details about
particular extensions.  Although SMTP was designed as a mail
transport and delivery protocol, this specification also contains
information that is important to its use as a "mail submission"
protocol for "split-UA" (User Agent) mail reading systems and mobile
Appendix B.  Generating SMTP Commands from RFC 822 Header
The objective of the Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP) is to
transfer mail reliably and efficiently.
SMTP is independent of the particular transmission subsystem and
requires only a reliable ordered data stream channel.  While this
document specifically discusses transport over TCP, other transports
are possible.  Appendices to RFC 821 [1] describe some of them.
An important feature of SMTP is its capability to transport mail
across multiple networks, usually referred to as "SMTP mail relaying"
(see Section 3.6).  A network consists of the mutually-TCP-accessible
hosts on the public Internet, the mutually-TCP-accessible hosts on a
firewall-isolated TCP/IP Intranet, or hosts in some other LAN or WAN
environment utilizing a non-TCP transport-level protocol.  Using
SMTP, a process can transfer mail to another process on the same
network or to some other network via a relay or gateway process
accessible to both networks.
In this way, a mail message may pass through a number of intermediate
relay or gateway hosts on its path from sender to ultimate recipient.
The Mail eXchanger mechanisms of the domain name system (RFC 1035
[2], RFC 974 [12], and Section 5 of this document) are used to
identify the appropriate next-hop destination for a message being
This document is a specification of the basic protocol for the
Internet electronic mail transport.  It consolidates, updates and
clarifies, but does not add new or change existing functionality of
o  the original SMTP (Simple Mail Transfer Protocol) specification of
o  domain name system requirements and implications for mail
o  the clarifications and applicability statements in RFC 1123 [3],
o  material drawn from the SMTP Extension mechanisms in RFC 1869
o  Editorial and clarification changes to RFC 2821 [14] to bring that
specification to Draft Standard.
RFC 821 specifies some features that were not in significant use in
the Internet by the mid-1990s and (in appendices) some additional
transport models.  Those sections are omitted here in the interest of
clarity and brevity; readers needing them should refer to RFC 821.
It also includes some additional material from RFC 1123 that required
amplification.  This material has been identified in multiple ways,
mostly by tracking flaming on various lists and newsgroups and
problems of unusual readings or interpretations that have appeared as
the SMTP extensions have been deployed.  Where this specification
moves beyond consolidation and actually differs from earlier
documents, it supersedes them technically as well as textually.
Although SMTP was designed as a mail transport and delivery protocol,
this specification also contains information that is important to its
use as a "mail submission" protocol, as recommended for Post Office
[17]).  In general, the separate mail submission protocol specified
in RFC 4409 [18] is now preferred to direct use of SMTP; more
discussion of that subject appears in that document.
Section 2.3 provides definitions of terms specific to this document.
Except when the historical terminology is necessary for clarity, this
document uses the current 'client' and 'server' terminology to
identify the sending and receiving SMTP processes, respectively.
A companion document, RFC 5322 [4], discusses message header sections
and bodies and specifies formats and structures for them.
document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [5].  As each
of these terms was intentionally and carefully chosen to improve the
interoperability of email, each use of these terms is to be treated
as a conformance requirement.
Because this document has a long history and to avoid the risk of
various errors and of confusing readers and documents that point to
this one, most examples and the domain names they contain are
preserved from RFC 2821.  Readers are cautioned that these are
illustrative examples that should not actually be used in either code
or configuration files.
The SMTP design can be pictured as:
When an SMTP client has a message to transmit, it establishes a two-
way transmission channel to an SMTP server.  The responsibility of an
SMTP client is to transfer mail messages to one or more SMTP servers,
or report its failure to do so.
The means by which a mail message is presented to an SMTP client, and
how that client determines the identifier(s) ("names") of the
domain(s) to which mail messages are to be transferred, is a local
matter, and is not addressed by this document.  In some cases, the
designated domain(s), or those determined by an SMTP client, will
identify the final destination(s) of the mail message.  In other
cases, common with SMTP clients associated with implementations of
protocols, or when the SMTP client is inside an isolated transport
service environment, the domain determined will identify an
intermediate destination through which all mail messages are to be
relayed.  SMTP clients that transfer all traffic regardless of the
target domains associated with the individual messages, or that do
not maintain queues for retrying message transmissions that initially
cannot be completed, may otherwise conform to this specification but
are not considered fully-capable.  Fully-capable SMTP
implementations, including the relays used by these less capable
ones, and their destinations, are expected to support all of the
queuing, retrying, and alternate address functions discussed in this
specification.  In many situations and configurations, the less-
capable clients discussed above SHOULD be using the message
submission protocol (RFC 4409 [18]) rather than SMTP.
The means by which an SMTP client, once it has determined a target
domain, determines the identity of an SMTP server to which a copy of
a message is to be transferred, and then performs that transfer, is
covered by this document.  To effect a mail transfer to an SMTP
server, an SMTP client establishes a two-way transmission channel to
that SMTP server.  An SMTP client determines the address of an
appropriate host running an SMTP server by resolving a destination
domain name to either an intermediate Mail eXchanger host or a final
An SMTP server may be either the ultimate destination or an
intermediate "relay" (that is, it may assume the role of an SMTP
client after receiving the message) or "gateway" (that is, it may
transport the message further using some protocol other than SMTP).
SMTP commands are generated by the SMTP client and sent to the SMTP
server.  SMTP replies are sent from the SMTP server to the SMTP
client in response to the commands.
In other words, message transfer can occur in a single connection
between the original SMTP-sender and the final SMTP-recipient, or can
occur in a series of hops through intermediary systems.  In either
case, once the server has issued a success response at the end of the
mail data, a formal handoff of responsibility for the message occurs:
the protocol requires that a server MUST accept responsibility for
either delivering the message or properly reporting the failure to do
Once the transmission channel is established and initial handshaking
is completed, the SMTP client normally initiates a mail transaction.
Such a transaction consists of a series of commands to specify the
originator and destination of the mail and transmission of the
message content (including any lines in the header section or other
structure) itself.  When the same message is sent to multiple
recipients, this protocol encourages the transmission of only one
copy of the data for all recipients at the same destination (or
intermediate relay) host.
The server responds to each command with a reply; replies may
indicate that the command was accepted, that additional commands are
expected, or that a temporary or permanent error condition exists.
Commands specifying the sender or recipients may include server-
permitted SMTP service extension requests, as discussed in
Section 2.2.  The dialog is purposely lock-step, one-at-a-time,
although this can be modified by mutually agreed upon extension
requests such as command pipelining (RFC 2920 [19]).
Once a given mail message has been transmitted, the client may either
request that the connection be shut down or may initiate other mail
transactions.  In addition, an SMTP client may use a connection to an
SMTP server for ancillary services such as verification of email
addresses or retrieval of mailing list subscriber addresses.
As suggested above, this protocol provides mechanisms for the
transmission of mail.  Historically, this transmission normally
occurred directly from the sending user's host to the receiving
user's host when the two hosts are connected to the same transport
service.  When they are not connected to the same transport service,
transmission occurs via one or more relay SMTP servers.  A very
common case in the Internet today involves submission of the original
message to an intermediate, "message submission" server, which is
similar to a relay but has some additional properties; such servers
are discussed in Section 2.3.10 and at some length in RFC 4409 [18].
An intermediate host that acts as either an SMTP relay or as a
gateway into some other transmission environment is usually selected
through the use of the domain name service (DNS) Mail eXchanger
Usually, intermediate hosts are determined via the DNS MX record, not
by explicit "source" routing (see Section 5 and Appendix C and
In an effort that started in 1990, approximately a decade after RFC
extensions" model that permits the client and server to agree to
utilize shared functionality beyond the original SMTP requirements.
The SMTP extension mechanism defines a means whereby an extended SMTP
client and server may recognize each other, and the server can inform
the client as to the service extensions that it supports.
Contemporary SMTP implementations MUST support the basic extension
mechanisms.  For instance, servers MUST support the EHLO command even
if they do not implement any specific extensions and clients SHOULD
preferentially utilize EHLO rather than HELO.  (However, for
compatibility with older conforming implementations, SMTP clients and
servers MUST support the original HELO mechanisms as a fallback.)
Unless the different characteristics of HELO must be identified for
interoperability purposes, this document discusses only EHLO.
SMTP is widely deployed and high-quality implementations have proven
to be very robust.  However, the Internet community now considers
some services to be important that were not anticipated when the
protocol was first designed.  If support for those services is to be
added, it must be done in a way that permits older implementations to
continue working acceptably.  The extension framework consists of:
o  The SMTP command EHLO, superseding the earlier HELO,
o  a registry of SMTP service extensions,
o  additional parameters to the SMTP MAIL and RCPT commands, and
o  optional replacements for commands defined in this protocol, such
as for DATA in non-ASCII transmissions (RFC 3030 [20]).
SMTP's strength comes primarily from its simplicity.  Experience with
many protocols has shown that protocols with few options tend towards
ubiquity, whereas protocols with many options tend towards obscurity.
Each and every extension, regardless of its benefits, must be
carefully scrutinized with respect to its implementation, deployment,
and interoperability costs.  In many cases, the cost of extending the
SMTP service will likely outweigh the benefit.
The IANA maintains a registry of SMTP service extensions.  A
corresponding EHLO keyword value is associated with each extension.
Each service extension registered with the IANA must be defined in a
formal Standards-Track or IESG-approved Experimental protocol
document.  The definition must include:
o  the textual name of the SMTP service extension;
o  the EHLO keyword value associated with the extension;
o  the syntax and possible values of parameters associated with the
o  any additional SMTP verbs associated with the extension
(additional verbs will usually be, but are not required to be, the
same as the EHLO keyword value);
o  any new parameters the extension associates with the MAIL or RCPT
o  a description of how support for the extension affects the
behavior of a server and client SMTP; and
o  the increment by which the extension is increasing the maximum
length of the commands MAIL and/or RCPT, over that specified in
In addition, any EHLO keyword value starting with an upper or lower
case "X" refers to a local SMTP service extension used exclusively
through bilateral agreement.  Keywords beginning with "X" MUST NOT be
used in a registered service extension.  Conversely, keyword values
presented in the EHLO response that do not begin with "X" MUST
correspond to a Standard, Standards-Track, or IESG-approved
Experimental SMTP service extension registered with IANA.  A
conforming server MUST NOT offer non-"X"-prefixed keyword values that
are not described in a registered extension.
Additional verbs and parameter names are bound by the same rules as
EHLO keywords; specifically, verbs beginning with "X" are local
extensions that may not be registered or standardized.  Conversely,
verbs not beginning with "X" must always be registered.
Extensions that change fairly basic properties of SMTP operation are
permitted.  The text in other sections of this document must be
understood in that context.  In particular, extensions can change the
minimum limits specified in Section 4.5.3, can change the ASCII
character set requirement as mentioned above, or can introduce some
optional modes of message handling.
In particular, if an extension implies that the delivery path
normally supports special features of that extension, and an
intermediate SMTP system finds a next hop that does not support the
required extension, it MAY choose, based on the specific extension
and circumstances, to requeue the message and try later and/or try an
alternate MX host.  If this strategy is employed, the timeout to fall
back to an unextended format (if one is available) SHOULD be less
than the normal timeout for bouncing as undeliverable (e.g., if
normal timeout is three days, the requeue timeout before attempting
to transmit the mail without the extension might be one day).
SMTP transports a mail object.  A mail object contains an envelope
The SMTP envelope is sent as a series of SMTP protocol units
(described in Section 3).  It consists of an originator address (to
which error reports should be directed), one or more recipient
addresses, and optional protocol extension material.  Historically,
variations on the reverse-path (originator) address specification
command (MAIL) could be used to specify alternate delivery modes,
such as immediate display; those variations have now been deprecated
(see Appendix F and Appendix F.6).
The SMTP content is sent in the SMTP DATA protocol unit and has two
parts: the header section and the body.  If the content conforms to
other contemporary standards, the header section consists of a
collection of header fields, each consisting of a header name, a
colon, and data, structured as in the message format specification
(RFC 5322 [4]); the body, if structured, is defined according to MIME
(RFC 2045 [21]).  The content is textual in nature, expressed using
the US-ASCII repertoire [6].  Although SMTP extensions (such as
"8BITMIME", RFC 1652 [22]) may relax this restriction for the content
body, the content header fields are always encoded using the US-ASCII
define an algorithm for representing header values outside the US-
ASCII repertoire, while still encoding them using the US-ASCII
In RFC 821, the two hosts participating in an SMTP transaction were
described as the "SMTP-sender" and "SMTP-receiver".  This document
has been changed to reflect current industry terminology and hence
refers to them as the "SMTP client" (or sometimes just "the client")
and "SMTP server" (or just "the server"), respectively.  Since a
given host may act both as server and client in a relay situation,
"receiver" and "sender" terminology is still used where needed for
Additional mail system terminology became common after RFC 821 was
published and, where convenient, is used in this specification.  In
particular, SMTP servers and clients provide a mail transport service
and therefore act as "Mail Transfer Agents" (MTAs).  "Mail User
Agents" (MUAs or UAs) are normally thought of as the sources and
targets of mail.  At the source, an MUA might collect mail to be
transmitted from a user and hand it off to an MTA; the final
("delivery") MTA would be thought of as handing the mail off to an
MUA (or at least transferring responsibility to it, e.g., by
depositing the message in a "message store").  However, while these
terms are used with at least the appearance of great precision in
other environments, the implied boundaries between MUAs and MTAs
often do not accurately match common, and conforming, practices with
Internet mail.  Hence, the reader should be cautious about inferring
the strong relationships and responsibilities that might be implied
if these terms were used elsewhere.
For the purposes of this specification, a host is a computer system
attached to the Internet (or, in some cases, to a private TCP/IP
network) and supporting the SMTP protocol.  Hosts are known by names
(see the next section); they SHOULD NOT be identified by numerical
addresses, i.e., by address literals as described in Section 4.1.2.
A domain name (or often just a "domain") consists of one or more
components, separated by dots if more than one appears.  In the case
of a top-level domain used by itself in an email address, a single
string is used without any dots.  This makes the requirement,
described in more detail below, that only fully-qualified domain
names appear in SMTP transactions on the public Internet,
particularly important where top-level domains are involved.  These
components ("labels" in DNS terminology, RFC 1035 [2]) are restricted
for SMTP purposes to consist of a sequence of letters, digits, and
hyphens drawn from the ASCII character set [6].  Domain names are
used as names of hosts and of other entities in the domain name
hierarchy.  For example, a domain may refer to an alias (label of a
CNAME RR) or the label of Mail eXchanger records to be used to
deliver mail instead of representing a host name.  See RFC 1035 [2]
and Section 5 of this specification.
The domain name, as described in this document and in RFC 1035 [2],
is the entire, fully-qualified name (often referred to as an "FQDN").
A domain name that is not in FQDN form is no more than a local alias.
Local aliases MUST NOT appear in any SMTP transaction.
Only resolvable, fully-qualified domain names (FQDNs) are permitted
when domain names are used in SMTP.  In other words, names that can
be resolved to MX RRs or address (i.e., A or AAAA) RRs (as discussed
in Section 5) are permitted, as are CNAME RRs whose targets can be
resolved, in turn, to MX or address RRs.  Local nicknames or
unqualified names MUST NOT be used.  There are two exceptions to the
o  The domain name given in the EHLO command MUST be either a primary
host name (a domain name that resolves to an address RR) or, if
the host has no name, an address literal, as described in
Section 4.1.3 and discussed further in the EHLO discussion of
o  The reserved mailbox name "postmaster" may be used in a RCPT
command without domain qualification (see Section 4.1.1.3) and
MUST be accepted if so used.
SMTP sessions are stateful, with both parties carefully maintaining a
common view of the current state.  In this document, we model this
state by a virtual "buffer" and a "state table" on the server that
may be used by the client to, for example, "clear the buffer" or
"reset the state table", causing the information in the buffer to be
discarded and the state to be returned to some previous state.
SMTP commands and, unless altered by a service extension, message
data, are transmitted from the sender to the receiver via the
transmission channel in "lines".
An SMTP reply is an acknowledgment (positive or negative) sent in
"lines" from receiver to sender via the transmission channel in
response to a command.  The general form of a reply is a numeric
completion code (indicating failure or success) usually followed by a
text string.  The codes are for use by programs and the text is
usually intended for human users.  RFC 3463 [25], specifies further
structuring of the reply strings, including the use of supplemental
and more specific completion codes (see also RFC 5248 [26]).
Lines consist of zero or more data characters terminated by the
sequence ASCII character "CR" (hex value 0D) followed immediately by
ASCII character "LF" (hex value 0A).  This termination sequence is
denoted as <CRLF> in this document.  Conforming implementations MUST
NOT recognize or generate any other character or character sequence
as a line terminator.  Limits MAY be imposed on line lengths by
In addition, the appearance of "bare" "CR" or "LF" characters in text
(i.e., either without the other) has a long history of causing
problems in mail implementations and applications that use the mail
system as a tool.  SMTP client implementations MUST NOT transmit
these characters except when they are intended as line terminators
and then MUST, as indicated above, transmit them only as a <CRLF>
The terms "message content" and "mail data" are used interchangeably
in this document to describe the material transmitted after the DATA
command is accepted and before the end of data indication is
transmitted.  Message content includes the message header section and
the possibly structured message body.  The MIME specification (RFC
This specification makes a distinction among four types of SMTP
systems, based on the role those systems play in transmitting
electronic mail.  An "originating" system (sometimes called an SMTP
originator) introduces mail into the Internet or, more generally,
into a transport service environment.  A "delivery" SMTP system is
one that receives mail from a transport service environment and
passes it to a mail user agent or deposits it in a message store that
a mail user agent is expected to subsequently access.  A "relay" SMTP
system (usually referred to just as a "relay") receives mail from an
SMTP client and transmits it, without modification to the message
data other than adding trace information, to another SMTP server for
further relaying or for delivery.
A "gateway" SMTP system (usually referred to just as a "gateway")
receives mail from a client system in one transport environment and
transmits it to a server system in another transport environment.
Differences in protocols or message semantics between the transport
environments on either side of a gateway may require that the gateway
system perform transformations to the message that are not permitted
to SMTP relay systems.  For the purposes of this specification,
firewalls that rewrite addresses should be considered as gateways,
even if SMTP is used on both sides of them (see RFC 2979 [27]).
As used in this specification, an "address" is a character string
that identifies a user to whom mail will be sent or a location into
which mail will be deposited.  The term "mailbox" refers to that
depository.  The two terms are typically used interchangeably unless
the distinction between the location in which mail is placed (the
mailbox) and a reference to it (the address) is important.  An
address normally consists of user and domain specifications.  The
standard mailbox naming convention is defined to be
"local-part@domain"; contemporary usage permits a much broader set of
applications than simple "user names".  Consequently, and due to a
long history of problems when intermediate hosts have attempted to
optimize transport by modifying them, the local-part MUST be
interpreted and assigned semantics only by the host specified in the
domain part of the address.
SMTP commands and replies have a rigid syntax.  All commands begin
with a command verb.  All replies begin with a three digit numeric
code.  In some commands and replies, arguments are required following
the verb or reply code.  Some commands do not accept arguments (after
the verb), and some reply codes are followed, sometimes optionally,
by free form text.  In both cases, where text appears, it is
separated from the verb or reply code by a space character.  Complete
definitions of commands and replies appear in Section 4.
Verbs and argument values (e.g., "TO:" or "to:" in the RCPT command
and extension name keywords) are not case sensitive, with the sole
exception in this specification of a mailbox local-part (SMTP
Extensions may explicitly specify case-sensitive elements).  That is,
a command verb, an argument value other than a mailbox local-part,
and free form text MAY be encoded in upper case, lower case, or any
mixture of upper and lower case with no impact on its meaning.  The
local-part of a mailbox MUST BE treated as case sensitive.
Therefore, SMTP implementations MUST take care to preserve the case
of mailbox local-parts.  In particular, for some hosts, the user
"smith" is different from the user "Smith".  However, exploiting the
case sensitivity of mailbox local-parts impedes interoperability and
is discouraged.  Mailbox domains follow normal DNS rules and are
hence not case sensitive.
A few SMTP servers, in violation of this specification (and RFC 821)
require that command verbs be encoded by clients in upper case.
Implementations MAY wish to employ this encoding to accommodate those
The argument clause consists of a variable-length character string
ending with the end of the line, i.e., with the character sequence
<CRLF>.  The receiver will take no action until this sequence is
The syntax for each command is shown with the discussion of that
command.  Common elements and parameters are shown in Section 4.1.2.
Commands and replies are composed of characters from the ASCII
character set [6].  When the transport service provides an 8-bit byte
(octet) transmission channel, each 7-bit character is transmitted,
right justified, in an octet with the high-order bit cleared to zero.
More specifically, the unextended SMTP service provides 7-bit
transport only.  An originating SMTP client that has not successfully
negotiated an appropriate extension with a particular server (see the
next paragraph) MUST NOT transmit messages with information in the
high-order bit of octets.  If such messages are transmitted in
violation of this rule, receiving SMTP servers MAY clear the high-
order bit or reject the message as invalid.  In general, a relay SMTP
SHOULD assume that the message content it has received is valid and,
assuming that the envelope permits doing so, relay it without
inspecting that content.  Of course, if the content is mislabeled and
the data path cannot accept the actual content, this may result in
the ultimate delivery of a severely garbled message to the recipient.
Delivery SMTP systems MAY reject such messages, or return them as
undeliverable, rather than deliver them.  In the absence of a server-
offered extension explicitly permitting it, a sending SMTP system is
not permitted to send envelope commands in any character set other
than US-ASCII.  Receiving systems SHOULD reject such commands,
normally using "500 syntax error - invalid character" replies.
8-bit message content transmission MAY be requested of the server by
a client using extended SMTP facilities, notably the "8BITMIME"
extension, RFC 1652 [22]. 8BITMIME SHOULD be supported by SMTP
servers.  However, it MUST NOT be construed as authorization to
transmit unrestricted 8-bit material, nor does 8BITMIME authorize
transmission of any envelope material in other than ASCII. 8BITMIME
MUST NOT be requested by senders for material with the high bit on
that is not in MIME format with an appropriate content-transfer
encoding; servers MAY reject such messages.
The metalinguistic notation used in this document corresponds to the
"Augmented BNF" used in other Internet mail system documents.  The
reader who is not familiar with that syntax should consult the ABNF
specification in RFC 5234 [7].  Metalanguage terms used in running
text are surrounded by pointed brackets (e.g., <CRLF>) for clarity.
The reader is cautioned that the grammar expressed in the
metalanguage is not comprehensive.  There are many instances in which
provisions in the text constrain or otherwise modify the syntax or
semantics implied by the grammar.
This section contains descriptions of the procedures used in SMTP:
session initiation, mail transaction, forwarding mail, verifying
mailbox names and expanding mailing lists, and opening and closing
exchanges.  Comments on relaying, a note on mail domains, and a
discussion of changing roles are included at the end of this section.
Several complete scenarios are presented in Appendix D.
An SMTP session is initiated when a client opens a connection to a
server and the server responds with an opening message.
SMTP server implementations MAY include identification of their
software and version information in the connection greeting reply
after the 220 code, a practice that permits more efficient isolation
and repair of any problems.  Implementations MAY make provision for
SMTP servers to disable the software and version announcement where
it causes security concerns.  While some systems also identify their
contact point for mail problems, this is not a substitute for
maintaining the required "postmaster" address (see Section 4).
The SMTP protocol allows a server to formally reject a mail session
while still allowing the initial connection as follows: a 554
response MAY be given in the initial connection opening message
instead of the 220.  A server taking this approach MUST still wait
for the client to send a QUIT (see Section 4.1.1.10) before closing
the connection and SHOULD respond to any intervening commands with
"503 bad sequence of commands".  Since an attempt to make an SMTP
connection to such a system is probably in error, a server returning
a 554 response on connection opening SHOULD provide enough
information in the reply text to facilitate debugging of the sending
Once the server has sent the greeting (welcoming) message and the
client has received it, the client normally sends the EHLO command to
the server, indicating the client's identity.  In addition to opening
the session, use of EHLO indicates that the client is able to process
service extensions and requests that the server provide a list of the
extensions it supports.  Older SMTP systems that are unable to
support service extensions, and contemporary clients that do not
require service extensions in the mail session being initiated, MAY
use HELO instead of EHLO.  Servers MUST NOT return the extended EHLO-
style response to a HELO command.  For a particular connection
attempt, if the server returns a "command not recognized" response to
EHLO, the client SHOULD be able to fall back and send HELO.
In the EHLO command, the host sending the command identifies itself;
the command may be interpreted as saying "Hello, I am <domain>" (and,
in the case of EHLO, "and I support service extension requests").
There are three steps to SMTP mail transactions.  The transaction
starts with a MAIL command that gives the sender identification.  (In
general, the MAIL command may be sent only when no mail transaction
is in progress; see Section 4.1.4.)  A series of one or more RCPT
commands follows, giving the receiver information.  Then, a DATA
command initiates transfer of the mail data and is terminated by the
"end of mail" data indicator, which also confirms the transaction.
The first step in the procedure is the MAIL command.
MAIL FROM:<reverse-path> [SP <mail-parameters> ] <CRLF>
This command tells the SMTP-receiver that a new mail transaction is
starting and to reset all its state tables and buffers, including any
recipients or mail data.  The <reverse-path> portion of the first or
only argument contains the source mailbox (between "<" and ">"
brackets), which can be used to report errors (see Section 4.2 for a
discussion of error reporting).  If accepted, the SMTP server returns
a "250 OK" reply.  If the mailbox specification is not acceptable for
some reason, the server MUST return a reply indicating whether the
failure is permanent (i.e., will occur again if the client tries to
send the same address again) or temporary (i.e., the address might be
accepted if the client tries again later).  Despite the apparent
scope of this requirement, there are circumstances in which the
acceptability of the reverse-path may not be determined until one or
more forward-paths (in RCPT commands) can be examined.  In those
cases, the server MAY reasonably accept the reverse-path (with a 250
reply) and then report problems after the forward-paths are received
and examined.  Normally, failures produce 550 or 553 replies.
Historically, the <reverse-path> was permitted to contain more than
just a mailbox; however, contemporary systems SHOULD NOT use source
The optional <mail-parameters> are associated with negotiated SMTP
service extensions (see Section 2.2).
The second step in the procedure is the RCPT command.  This step of
the procedure can be repeated any number of times.
RCPT TO:<forward-path> [ SP <rcpt-parameters> ] <CRLF>
The first or only argument to this command includes a forward-path
(normally a mailbox and domain, always surrounded by "<" and ">"
brackets) identifying one recipient.  If accepted, the SMTP server
returns a "250 OK" reply and stores the forward-path.  If the
recipient is known not to be a deliverable address, the SMTP server
returns a 550 reply, typically with a string such as "no such user -
" and the mailbox name (other circumstances and reply codes are
The <forward-path> can contain more than just a mailbox.
Historically, the <forward-path> was permitted to contain a source
routing list of hosts and the destination mailbox; however,
contemporary SMTP clients SHOULD NOT utilize source routes (see
Appendix C).  Servers MUST be prepared to encounter a list of source
routes in the forward-path, but they SHOULD ignore the routes or MAY
decline to support the relaying they imply.  Similarly, servers MAY
decline to accept mail that is destined for other hosts or systems.
These restrictions make a server useless as a relay for clients that
do not support full SMTP functionality.  Consequently, restricted-
capability clients MUST NOT assume that any SMTP server on the
Internet can be used as their mail processing (relaying) site.  If a
RCPT command appears without a previous MAIL command, the server MUST
return a 503 "Bad sequence of commands" response.  The optional
<rcpt-parameters> are associated with negotiated SMTP service
extensions (see Section 2.2).
Since it has been a common source of errors, it is worth noting that
spaces are not permitted on either side of the colon following FROM
in the MAIL command or TO in the RCPT command.  The syntax is exactly
The third step in the procedure is the DATA command (or some
alternative specified in a service extension).
If accepted, the SMTP server returns a 354 Intermediate reply and
considers all succeeding lines up to but not including the end of
mail data indicator to be the message text.  When the end of text is
successfully received and stored, the SMTP-receiver sends a "250 OK"
Since the mail data is sent on the transmission channel, the end of
mail data must be indicated so that the command and reply dialog can
be resumed.  SMTP indicates the end of the mail data by sending a
line containing only a "." (period or full stop).  A transparency
procedure is used to prevent this from interfering with the user's
The end of mail data indicator also confirms the mail transaction and
tells the SMTP server to now process the stored recipients and mail
data.  If accepted, the SMTP server returns a "250 OK" reply.  The
DATA command can fail at only two points in the protocol exchange:
If there was no MAIL, or no RCPT, command, or all such commands were
rejected, the server MAY return a "command out of sequence" (503) or
"no valid recipients" (554) reply in response to the DATA command.
If one of those replies (or any other 5yz reply) is received, the
client MUST NOT send the message data; more generally, message data
MUST NOT be sent unless a 354 reply is received.
If the verb is initially accepted and the 354 reply issued, the DATA
command should fail only if the mail transaction was incomplete (for
example, no recipients), if resources were unavailable (including, of
course, the server unexpectedly becoming unavailable), or if the
server determines that the message should be rejected for policy or
However, in practice, some servers do not perform recipient
verification until after the message text is received.  These servers
SHOULD treat a failure for one or more recipients as a "subsequent
failure" and return a mail message as discussed in Section 6 and, in
particular, in Section 6.1.  Using a "550 mailbox not found" (or
equivalent) reply code after the data are accepted makes it difficult
or impossible for the client to determine which recipients failed.
When the RFC 822 format ([28], [4]) is being used, the mail data
include the header fields such as those named Date, Subject, To, Cc,
and From.  Server SMTP systems SHOULD NOT reject messages based on
perceived defects in the RFC 822 or MIME (RFC 2045 [21]) message
header section or message body.  In particular, they MUST NOT reject
messages in which the numbers of Resent-header fields do not match or
Resent-to appears without Resent-from and/or Resent-date.
Mail transaction commands MUST be used in the order discussed above.
Forwarding support is most often required to consolidate and simplify
addresses within, or relative to, some enterprise and less frequently
to establish addresses to link a person's prior address with a
current one.  Silent forwarding of messages (without server
notification to the sender), for security or non-disclosure purposes,
is common in the contemporary Internet.
In both the enterprise and the "new address" cases, information
hiding (and sometimes security) considerations argue against exposure
of the "final" address through the SMTP protocol as a side effect of
the forwarding activity.  This may be especially important when the
final address may not even be reachable by the sender.  Consequently,
the "forwarding" mechanisms described in Section 3.2 of RFC 821, and
especially the 251 (corrected destination) and 551 reply codes from
RCPT must be evaluated carefully by implementers and, when they are
available, by those configuring systems (see also Section 7.4).
o  Servers MAY forward messages when they are aware of an address
change.  When they do so, they MAY either provide address-updating
information with a 251 code, or may forward "silently" and return
a 250 code.  However, if a 251 code is used, they MUST NOT assume
that the client will actually update address information or even
return that information to the user.
o  Servers MAY reject messages or return them as non-deliverable when
they cannot be delivered precisely as addressed.  When they do so,
they MAY either provide address-updating information with a 551
code, or may reject the message as undeliverable with a 550 code
and no address-specific information.  However, if a 551 code is
used, they MUST NOT assume that the client will actually update
address information or even return that information to the user.
SMTP server implementations that support the 251 and/or 551 reply
codes SHOULD provide configuration mechanisms so that sites that
conclude that they would undesirably disclose information can disable
SMTP provides commands to verify a user name or obtain the content of
a mailing list.  This is done with the VRFY and EXPN commands, which
have character string arguments.  Implementations SHOULD support VRFY
and EXPN (however, see Section 3.5.2 and Section 7.3).
For the VRFY command, the string is a user name or a user name and
domain (see below).  If a normal (i.e., 250) response is returned,
the response MAY include the full name of the user and MUST include
the mailbox of the user.  It MUST be in either of the following
User Name <local-part@domain>
When a name that is the argument to VRFY could identify more than one
mailbox, the server MAY either note the ambiguity or identify the
alternatives.  In other words, any of the following are legitimate
553- Ambiguous; Possibilities are
553-Joe Smith <jsmith@foo.com>
553-Harry Smith <hsmith@foo.com>
553-Ambiguous; Possibilities
Under normal circumstances, a client receiving a 553 reply would be
expected to expose the result to the user.  Use of exactly the forms
given, and the "user ambiguous" or "ambiguous" keywords, possibly
supplemented by extended reply codes, such as those described in RFC
as needed.  Of course, a client that was highly automated or that was
operating in another language than English might choose to try to
translate the response to return some other indication to the user
than the literal text of the reply, or to take some automated action
such as consulting a directory service for additional information
before reporting to the user.
For the EXPN command, the string identifies a mailing list, and the
successful (i.e., 250) multiline response MAY include the full name
of the users and MUST give the mailboxes on the mailing list.
In some hosts, the distinction between a mailing list and an alias
for a single mailbox is a bit fuzzy, since a common data structure
may hold both types of entries, and it is possible to have mailing
lists containing only one mailbox.  If a request is made to apply
VRFY to a mailing list, a positive response MAY be given if a message
so addressed would be delivered to everyone on the list, otherwise an
error SHOULD be reported (e.g., "550 That is a mailing list, not a
user" or "252 Unable to verify members of mailing list").  If a
request is made to expand a user name, the server MAY return a
positive response consisting of a list containing one name, or an
error MAY be reported (e.g., "550 That is a user name, not a mailing
In the case of a successful multiline reply (normal for EXPN),
exactly one mailbox is to be specified on each line of the reply.
The case of an ambiguous request is discussed above.
"User name" is a fuzzy term and has been used deliberately.  An
implementation of the VRFY or EXPN commands MUST include at least
recognition of local mailboxes as "user names".  However, since
current Internet practice often results in a single host handling
mail for multiple domains, hosts, especially hosts that provide this
functionality, SHOULD accept the "local-part@domain" form as a "user
name"; hosts MAY also choose to recognize other strings as "user
The case of expanding a mailbox list requires a multiline reply, such
S: 250-Fred Fonebone <Fonebone@physics.foo-u.edu>
S: 250 Sam Q. Smith <SQSmith@specific.generic.com>
C: EXPN Executive-Washroom-List
The character string arguments of the VRFY and EXPN commands cannot
be further restricted due to the variety of implementations of the
user name and mailbox list concepts.  On some systems, it may be
appropriate for the argument of the EXPN command to be a file name
for a file containing a mailing list, but again there are a variety
of file naming conventions in the Internet.  Similarly, historical
variations in what is returned by these commands are such that the
response SHOULD be interpreted very carefully, if at all, and SHOULD
generally only be used for diagnostic purposes.
When normal (2yz or 551) responses are returned from a VRFY or EXPN
request, the reply MUST include the <Mailbox> name using a
"<local-part@domain>" construction, where "domain" is a fully-
qualified domain name.  In circumstances exceptional enough to
justify violating the intent of this specification, free-form text
MAY be returned.  In order to facilitate parsing by both computers
and people, addresses SHOULD appear in pointed brackets.  When
addresses, rather than free-form debugging information, are returned,
EXPN and VRFY MUST return only valid domain addresses that are usable
in SMTP RCPT commands.  Consequently, if an address implies delivery
to a program or other system, the mailbox name used to reach that
target MUST be given.  Paths (explicit source routes) MUST NOT be
returned by VRFY or EXPN.
Server implementations SHOULD support both VRFY and EXPN.  For
security reasons, implementations MAY provide local installations a
way to disable either or both of these commands through configuration
options or the equivalent (see Section 7.3).  When these commands are
supported, they are not required to work across relays when relaying
is supported.  Since they were both optional in RFC 821, but VRFY was
made mandatory in RFC 1123 [3], if EXPN is supported, it MUST be
listed as a service extension in an EHLO response.  VRFY MAY be
listed as a convenience but, since support for it is required, SMTP
clients are not required to check for its presence on the extension
A server MUST NOT return a 250 code in response to a VRFY or EXPN
command unless it has actually verified the address.  In particular,
a server MUST NOT return 250 if all it has done is to verify that the
syntax given is valid.  In that case, 502 (Command not implemented)
or 500 (Syntax error, command unrecognized) SHOULD be returned.  As
stated elsewhere, implementation (in the sense of actually validating
addresses and returning information) of VRFY and EXPN are strongly
recommended.  Hence, implementations that return 500 or 502 for VRFY
are not in full compliance with this specification.
There may be circumstances where an address appears to be valid but
cannot reasonably be verified in real time, particularly when a
server is acting as a mail exchanger for another server or domain.
"Apparent validity", in this case, would normally involve at least
syntax checking and might involve verification that any domains
specified were ones to which the host expected to be able to relay
mail.  In these situations, reply code 252 SHOULD be returned.  These
cases parallel the discussion of RCPT verification in Section 2.1.
Similarly, the discussion in Section 3.4 applies to the use of reply
codes 251 and 551 with VRFY (and EXPN) to indicate addresses that are
recognized but that would be forwarded or rejected were mail received
for them.  Implementations generally SHOULD be more aggressive about
address verification in the case of VRFY than in the case of RCPT,
even if it takes a little longer to do so.
EXPN is often very useful in debugging and understanding problems
with mailing lists and multiple-target-address aliases.  Some systems
have attempted to use source expansion of mailing lists as a means of
eliminating duplicates.  The propagation of aliasing systems with
mail on the Internet for hosts (typically with MX and CNAME DNS
records), for mailboxes (various types of local host aliases), and in
various proxying arrangements has made it nearly impossible for these
strategies to work consistently, and mail systems SHOULD NOT attempt
In general, the availability of Mail eXchanger records in the domain
source routes in the Internet mail system unnecessary.  Many
historical problems with the interpretation of explicit source routes
have made their use undesirable.  SMTP clients SHOULD NOT generate
explicit source routes except under unusual circumstances.  SMTP
servers MAY decline to act as mail relays or to accept addresses that
specify source routes.  When route information is encountered, SMTP
servers MAY ignore the route information and simply send to the final
destination specified as the last element in the route and SHOULD do
so.  There has been an invalid practice of using names that do not
appear in the DNS as destination names, with the senders counting on
the intermediate hosts specified in source routing to resolve any
problems.  If source routes are stripped, this practice will cause
failures.  This is one of several reasons why SMTP clients MUST NOT
generate invalid source routes or depend on serial resolution of
When source routes are not used, the process described in RFC 821 for
constructing a reverse-path from the forward-path is not applicable
and the reverse-path at the time of delivery will simply be the
address that appeared in the MAIL command.
A relay SMTP server is usually the target of a DNS MX record that
designates it, rather than the final delivery system.  The relay
server may accept or reject the task of relaying the mail in the same
way it accepts or rejects mail for a local user.  If it accepts the
task, it then becomes an SMTP client, establishes a transmission
channel to the next SMTP server specified in the DNS (according to
the rules in Section 5), and sends it the mail.  If it declines to
relay mail to a particular address for policy reasons, a 550 response
This specification does not deal with the verification of return
paths for use in delivery notifications.  Recent work, such as that
on SPF [29] and DKIM [30] [31], has been done to provide ways to
ascertain that an address is valid or belongs to the person who
actually sent the message.  A server MAY attempt to verify the return
path before using its address for delivery notifications, but methods
of doing so are not defined here nor is any particular method
recommended at this time.
Many mail-sending clients exist, especially in conjunction with
facilities that receive mail via POP3 or IMAP, that have limited
capability to support some of the requirements of this specification,
such as the ability to queue messages for subsequent delivery
attempts.  For these clients, it is common practice to make private
arrangements to send all messages to a single server for processing
and subsequent distribution.  SMTP, as specified here, is not ideally
suited for this role.  A standardized mail submission protocol has
been developed that is gradually superseding practices based on SMTP
(see RFC 4409 [18]).  In any event, because these arrangements are
private and fall outside the scope of this specification, they are
It is important to note that MX records can point to SMTP servers
that act as gateways into other environments, not just SMTP relays
and final delivery systems; see Sections 3.7 and 5.
If an SMTP server has accepted the task of relaying the mail and
later finds that the destination is incorrect or that the mail cannot
be delivered for some other reason, then it MUST construct an
"undeliverable mail" notification message and send it to the
originator of the undeliverable mail (as indicated by the reverse-
path).  Formats specified for non-delivery reports by other standards
This notification message must be from the SMTP server at the relay
host or the host that first determines that delivery cannot be
accomplished.  Of course, SMTP servers MUST NOT send notification
messages about problems transporting notification messages.  One way
to prevent loops in error reporting is to specify a null reverse-path
in the MAIL command of a notification message.  When such a message
is transmitted, the reverse-path MUST be set to null (see
Section 4.5.5 for additional discussion).  A MAIL command with a null
reverse-path appears as follows:
As discussed in Section 6.4, a relay SMTP has no need to inspect or
act upon the header section or body of the message data and MUST NOT
do so except to add its own "Received:" header field (Section 4.4)
and, optionally, to attempt to detect looping in the mail system (see
Section 6.3).  Of course, this prohibition also applies to any
modifications of these header fields or text (see also Section 7.9).
While the relay function discussed above operates within the Internet
SMTP transport service environment, MX records or various forms of
explicit routing may require that an intermediate SMTP server perform
a translation function between one transport service and another.  As
discussed in Section 2.3.10, when such a system is at the boundary
between two transport service environments, we refer to it as a
"gateway" or "gateway SMTP".
Gatewaying mail between different mail environments, such as
different mail formats and protocols, is complex and does not easily
yield to standardization.  However, some general requirements may be
given for a gateway between the Internet and another mail
Header fields MAY be rewritten when necessary as messages are
gatewayed across mail environment boundaries.  This may involve
inspecting the message body or interpreting the local-part of the
destination address in spite of the prohibitions in Section 6.4.
Other mail systems gatewayed to the Internet often use a subset of
the RFC 822 header section or provide similar functionality with a
different syntax, but some of these mail systems do not have an
equivalent to the SMTP envelope.  Therefore, when a message leaves
the Internet environment, it may be necessary to fold the SMTP
envelope information into the message header section.  A possible
solution would be to create new header fields to carry the envelope
information (e.g., "X-SMTP-MAIL:" and "X-SMTP-RCPT:"); however, this
would require changes in mail programs in foreign environments and
might risk disclosure of private information (see Section 7.2).
When forwarding a message into or out of the Internet environment, a
gateway MUST prepend a Received: line, but it MUST NOT alter in any
way a Received: line that is already in the header section.
"Received:" header fields of messages originating from other
environments may not conform exactly to this specification.  However,
the most important use of Received: lines is for debugging mail
faults, and this debugging can be severely hampered by well-meaning
gateways that try to "fix" a Received: line.  As another consequence
of trace header fields arising in non-SMTP environments, receiving
systems MUST NOT reject mail based on the format of a trace header
field and SHOULD be extremely robust in the light of unexpected
information or formats in those header fields.
The gateway SHOULD indicate the environment and protocol in the "via"
clauses of Received header field(s) that it supplies.
From the Internet side, the gateway SHOULD accept all valid address
formats in SMTP commands and in the RFC 822 header section, and all
valid RFC 822 messages.  Addresses and header fields generated by
gateways MUST conform to applicable standards (including this one and
RFC 5322 [4]).  Gateways are, of course, subject to the same rules
for handling source routes as those described for other SMTP systems
The gateway MUST ensure that all header fields of a message that it
forwards into the Internet mail environment meet the requirements for
Internet mail.  In particular, all addresses in "From:", "To:",
"Cc:", etc., header fields MUST be transformed (if necessary) to
satisfy the standard header syntax of RFC 5322 [4], MUST reference
only fully-qualified domain names, and MUST be effective and useful
for sending replies.  The translation algorithm used to convert mail
from the Internet protocols to another environment's protocol SHOULD
ensure that error messages from the foreign mail environment are
delivered to the reverse-path from the SMTP envelope, not to an
address in the "From:", "Sender:", or similar header fields of the
Similarly, when forwarding a message from another environment into
the Internet, the gateway SHOULD set the envelope return path in
accordance with an error message return address, if supplied by the
foreign environment.  If the foreign environment has no equivalent
concept, the gateway must select and use a best approximation, with
the message originator's address as the default of last resort.
An SMTP connection is terminated when the client sends a QUIT
command.  The server responds with a positive reply code, after which
it closes the connection.
An SMTP server MUST NOT intentionally close the connection under
normal operational circumstances (see Section 7.8) except:
o  After receiving a QUIT command and responding with a 221 reply.
o  After detecting the need to shut down the SMTP service and
returning a 421 response code.  This response code can be issued
after the server receives any command or, if necessary,
asynchronously from command receipt (on the assumption that the
client will receive it after the next command is issued).
o  After a timeout, as specified in Section 4.5.3.2, occurs waiting
for the client to send a command or data.
In particular, a server that closes connections in response to
commands that are not understood is in violation of this
specification.  Servers are expected to be tolerant of unknown
commands, issuing a 500 reply and awaiting further instructions from
An SMTP server that is forcibly shut down via external means SHOULD
attempt to send a line containing a 421 response code to the SMTP
client before exiting.  The SMTP client will normally read the 421
response code after sending its next command.
SMTP clients that experience a connection close, reset, or other
communications failure due to circumstances not under their control
(in violation of the intent of this specification but sometimes
unavoidable) SHOULD, to maintain the robustness of the mail system,
treat the mail transaction as if a 451 response had been received and
An SMTP-capable host SHOULD support both the alias and the list
models of address expansion for multiple delivery.  When a message is
delivered or forwarded to each address of an expanded list form, the
return address in the envelope ("MAIL FROM:") MUST be changed to be
the address of a person or other entity who administers the list.
However, in this case, the message header section (RFC 5322 [4]) MUST
be left unchanged; in particular, the "From" field of the header
An important mail facility is a mechanism for multi-destination
delivery of a single message, by transforming (or "expanding" or
"exploding") a pseudo-mailbox address into a list of destination
mailbox addresses.  When a message is sent to such a pseudo-mailbox
(sometimes called an "exploder"), copies are forwarded or
redistributed to each mailbox in the expanded list.  Servers SHOULD
simply utilize the addresses on the list; application of heuristics
or other matching rules to eliminate some addresses, such as that of
the originator, is strongly discouraged.  We classify such a pseudo-
mailbox as an "alias" or a "list", depending upon the expansion
To expand an alias, the recipient mailer simply replaces the pseudo-
mailbox address in the envelope with each of the expanded addresses
in turn; the rest of the envelope and the message body are left
unchanged.  The message is then delivered or forwarded to each
A mailing list may be said to operate by "redistribution" rather than
by "forwarding".  To expand a list, the recipient mailer replaces the
pseudo-mailbox address in the envelope with each of the expanded
addresses in turn.  The return (backward-pointing) address in the
envelope is changed so that all error messages generated by the final
deliveries will be returned to a list administrator, not to the
message originator, who generally has no control over the contents of
the list and will typically find error messages annoying.  Note that
the key difference between handling aliases (Section 3.9.1) and
forwarding (this subsection) is the change to the backward-pointing
address in this case.  When a list constrains its processing to the
very limited set of modifications and actions described here, it is
attempting to emulate an MTA; such lists can be treated as a
continuation in email transit.
There exist mailing lists that perform additional, sometimes
extensive, modifications to a message and its envelope.  Such mailing
lists need to be viewed as full MUAs, which accept a delivery and
The SMTP commands define the mail transfer or the mail system
function requested by the user.  SMTP commands are character strings
terminated by <CRLF>.  The commands themselves are alphabetic
characters terminated by <SP> if parameters follow and <CRLF>
otherwise.  (In the interest of improved interoperability, SMTP
receivers SHOULD tolerate trailing white space before the terminating
<CRLF>.)  The syntax of the local part of a mailbox MUST conform to
receiver site conventions and the syntax specified in Section 4.1.2.
The SMTP commands are discussed below.  The SMTP replies are
A mail transaction involves several data objects that are
communicated as arguments to different commands.  The reverse-path is
the argument of the MAIL command, the forward-path is the argument of
the RCPT command, and the mail data is the argument of the DATA
command.  These arguments or data objects must be transmitted and
held, pending the confirmation communicated by the end of mail data
indication that finalizes the transaction.  The model for this is
that distinct buffers are provided to hold the types of data objects;
that is, there is a reverse-path buffer, a forward-path buffer, and a
mail data buffer.  Specific commands cause information to be appended
to a specific buffer, or cause one or more buffers to be cleared.
Several commands (RSET, DATA, QUIT) are specified as not permitting
parameters.  In the absence of specific extensions offered by the
server and accepted by the client, clients MUST NOT send such
parameters and servers SHOULD reject commands containing them as
These commands are used to identify the SMTP client to the SMTP
server.  The argument clause contains the fully-qualified domain name
of the SMTP client, if one is available.  In situations in which the
SMTP client system does not have a meaningful domain name (e.g., when
its address is dynamically allocated and no reverse mapping record is
available), the client SHOULD send an address literal (see
RFC 2821, and some earlier informal practices, encouraged following
the literal by information that would help to identify the client
system.  That convention was not widely supported, and many SMTP
servers considered it an error.  In the interest of interoperability,
it is probably wise for servers to be prepared for this string to
occur, but SMTP clients SHOULD NOT send it.
The SMTP server identifies itself to the SMTP client in the
connection greeting reply and in the response to this command.
A client SMTP SHOULD start an SMTP session by issuing the EHLO
command.  If the SMTP server supports the SMTP service extensions, it
will give a successful response, a failure response, or an error
response.  If the SMTP server, in violation of this specification,
does not support any SMTP service extensions, it will generate an
error response.  Older client SMTP systems MAY, as discussed above,
use HELO (as specified in RFC 821) instead of EHLO, and servers MUST
support the HELO command and reply properly to it.  In any event, a
client MUST issue HELO or EHLO before starting a mail transaction.
These commands, and a "250 OK" reply to one of them, confirm that
both the SMTP client and the SMTP server are in the initial state,
that is, there is no transaction in progress and all state tables and
Normally, the response to EHLO will be a multiline reply.  Each line
of the response contains a keyword and, optionally, one or more
parameters.  Following the normal syntax for multiline replies, these
keywords follow the code (250) and a hyphen for all but the last
line, and the code and a space for the last line.  The syntax for a
positive response, using the ABNF notation and terminal symbols of
ehlo-line      = ehlo-keyword *( SP ehlo-param )
; additional syntax of ehlo-params depends on
Although EHLO keywords may be specified in upper, lower, or mixed
case, they MUST always be recognized and processed in a case-
insensitive manner.  This is simply an extension of practices
specified in RFC 821 and Section 2.4.
The EHLO response MUST contain keywords (and associated parameters if
required) for all commands not listed as "required" in Section 4.5.1
excepting only private-use commands as described in Section 4.1.5.
Private-use commands MAY be listed.
This command is used to initiate a mail transaction in which the mail
data is delivered to an SMTP server that may, in turn, deliver it to
one or more mailboxes or pass it on to another system (possibly using
SMTP).  The argument clause contains a reverse-path and may contain
optional parameters.  In general, the MAIL command may be sent only
when no mail transaction is in progress, see Section 4.1.4.
The reverse-path consists of the sender mailbox.  Historically, that
mailbox might optionally have been preceded by a list of hosts, but
that behavior is now deprecated (see Appendix C).  In some types of
reporting messages for which a reply is likely to cause a mail loop
(for example, mail delivery and non-delivery notifications), the
reverse-path may be null (see Section 3.6).
This command clears the reverse-path buffer, the forward-path buffer,
and the mail data buffer, and it inserts the reverse-path information
from its argument clause into the reverse-path buffer.
If service extensions were negotiated, the MAIL command may also
carry parameters associated with a particular service extension.
mail = "MAIL FROM:" Reverse-path
This command is used to identify an individual recipient of the mail
data; multiple recipients are specified by multiple uses of this
command.  The argument clause contains a forward-path and may contain
The forward-path normally consists of the required destination
mailbox.  Sending systems SHOULD NOT generate the optional list of
hosts known as a source route.  Receiving systems MUST recognize
source route syntax but SHOULD strip off the source route
specification and utilize the domain name associated with the mailbox
as if the source route had not been provided.
Similarly, relay hosts SHOULD strip or ignore source routes, and
names MUST NOT be copied into the reverse-path.  When mail reaches
its ultimate destination (the forward-path contains only a
destination mailbox), the SMTP server inserts it into the destination
mailbox in accordance with its host mail conventions.
This command appends its forward-path argument to the forward-path
buffer; it does not change the reverse-path buffer nor the mail data
For example, mail received at relay host xyz.com with envelope
MAIL FROM:<userx@y.foo.org>
RCPT TO:<@hosta.int,@jkl.org:userc@d.bar.org>
will normally be sent directly on to host d.bar.org with envelope
As provided in Appendix C, xyz.com MAY also choose to relay the
message to hosta.int, using the envelope commands
or to jkl.org, using the envelope commands
RCPT TO:<@jkl.org:userc@d.bar.org>
Attempting to use relaying this way is now strongly discouraged.
Since hosts are not required to relay mail at all, xyz.com MAY also
reject the message entirely when the RCPT command is received, using
a 550 code (since this is a "policy reason").
If service extensions were negotiated, the RCPT command may also
carry parameters associated with a particular service extension
offered by the server.  The client MUST NOT transmit parameters other
than those associated with a service extension offered by the server
Note that, in a departure from the usual rules for
local-parts, the "Postmaster" string shown above is
The receiver normally sends a 354 response to DATA, and then treats
the lines (strings ending in <CRLF> sequences, as described in
Section 2.3.7) following the command as mail data from the sender.
This command causes the mail data to be appended to the mail data
buffer.  The mail data may contain any of the 128 ASCII character
codes, although experience has indicated that use of control
characters other than SP, HT, CR, and LF may cause problems and
SHOULD be avoided when possible.
The mail data are terminated by a line containing only a period, that
is, the character sequence "<CRLF>.<CRLF>", where the first <CRLF> is
actually the terminator of the previous line (see Section 4.5.2).
This is the end of mail data indication.  The first <CRLF> of this
terminating sequence is also the <CRLF> that ends the final line of
the data (message text) or, if there was no mail data, ends the DATA
command itself (the "no mail data" case does not conform to this
specification since it would require that neither the trace header
fields required by this specification nor the message header section
required by RFC 5322 [4] be transmitted).  An extra <CRLF> MUST NOT
be added, as that would cause an empty line to be added to the
message.  The only exception to this rule would arise if the message
body were passed to the originating SMTP-sender with a final "line"
that did not end in <CRLF>; in that case, the originating SMTP system
MUST either reject the message as invalid or add <CRLF> in order to
have the receiving SMTP server recognize the "end of data" condition.
The custom of accepting lines ending only in <LF>, as a concession to
non-conforming behavior on the part of some UNIX systems, has proven
to cause more interoperability problems than it solves, and SMTP
server systems MUST NOT do this, even in the name of improved
robustness.  In particular, the sequence "<LF>.<LF>" (bare line
feeds, without carriage returns) MUST NOT be treated as equivalent to
<CRLF>.<CRLF> as the end of mail data indication.
Receipt of the end of mail data indication requires the server to
process the stored mail transaction information.  This processing
consumes the information in the reverse-path buffer, the forward-path
buffer, and the mail data buffer, and on the completion of this
command these buffers are cleared.  If the processing is successful,
the receiver MUST send an OK reply.  If the processing fails, the
receiver MUST send a failure reply.  The SMTP model does not allow
for partial failures at this point: either the message is accepted by
the server for delivery and a positive response is returned or it is
not accepted and a failure reply is returned.  In sending a positive
"250 OK" completion reply to the end of data indication, the receiver
takes full responsibility for the message (see Section 6.1).  Errors
that are diagnosed subsequently MUST be reported in a mail message,
as discussed in Section 4.4.
When the SMTP server accepts a message either for relaying or for
final delivery, it inserts a trace record (also referred to
interchangeably as a "time stamp line" or "Received" line) at the top
of the mail data.  This trace record indicates the identity of the
host that sent the message, the identity of the host that received
the message (and is inserting this time stamp), and the date and time
the message was received.  Relayed messages will have multiple time
stamp lines.  Details for formation of these lines, including their
syntax, is specified in Section 4.4.
Additional discussion about the operation of the DATA command appears
This command specifies that the current mail transaction will be
aborted.  Any stored sender, recipients, and mail data MUST be
discarded, and all buffers and state tables cleared.  The receiver
MUST send a "250 OK" reply to a RSET command with no arguments.  A
reset command may be issued by the client at any time.  It is
effectively equivalent to a NOOP (i.e., it has no effect) if issued
immediately after EHLO, before EHLO is issued in the session, after
an end of data indicator has been sent and acknowledged, or
immediately before a QUIT.  An SMTP server MUST NOT close the
connection as the result of receiving a RSET; that action is reserved
Since EHLO implies some additional processing and response by the
server, RSET will normally be more efficient than reissuing that
command, even though the formal semantics are the same.
There are circumstances, contrary to the intent of this
specification, in which an SMTP server may receive an indication that
the underlying TCP connection has been closed or reset.  To preserve
the robustness of the mail system, SMTP servers SHOULD be prepared
for this condition and SHOULD treat it as if a QUIT had been received
before the connection disappeared.
This command asks the receiver to confirm that the argument
identifies a user or mailbox.  If it is a user name, information is
returned as specified in Section 3.5.
This command has no effect on the reverse-path buffer, the forward-
path buffer, or the mail data buffer.
vrfy = "VRFY" SP String CRLF
identifies a mailing list, and if so, to return the membership of
that list.  If the command is successful, a reply is returned
containing information as described in Section 3.5.  This reply will
have multiple lines except in the trivial case of a one-member list.
path buffer, or the mail data buffer, and it may be issued at any
expn = "EXPN" SP String CRLF
This command causes the server to send helpful information to the
client.  The command MAY take an argument (e.g., any command name)
and return more specific information as a response.
SMTP servers SHOULD support HELP without arguments and MAY support it
This command does not affect any parameters or previously entered
commands.  It specifies no action other than that the receiver send a
time.  If a parameter string is specified, servers SHOULD ignore it.
This command specifies that the receiver MUST send a "221 OK" reply,
and then close the transmission channel.
The receiver MUST NOT intentionally close the transmission channel
until it receives and replies to a QUIT command (even if there was an
error).  The sender MUST NOT intentionally close the transmission
channel until it sends a QUIT command, and it SHOULD wait until it
receives the reply (even if there was an error response to a previous
command).  If the connection is closed prematurely due to violations
of the above or system or network failure, the server MUST cancel any
pending transaction, but not undo any previously completed
transaction, and generally MUST act as if the command or transaction
in progress had received a temporary error (i.e., a 4yz response).
The QUIT command may be issued at any time.  Any current uncompleted
mail transaction will be aborted.
If the server SMTP does not recognize or cannot implement one or more
of the parameters associated with a particular MAIL FROM or RCPT TO
command, it will return code 555.
If, for some reason, the server is temporarily unable to accommodate
one or more of the parameters associated with a MAIL FROM or RCPT TO
command, and if the definition of the specific parameter does not
mandate the use of another code, it should return code 455.
Errors specific to particular parameters and their values will be
specified in the parameter's defining RFC.
The syntax of the argument clauses of the above commands (using the
syntax specified in RFC 5234 [7] where applicable) is given below.
Some of the productions given below are used only in conjunction with
source routes as described in Appendix C.  Terminals not defined in
this document, such as ALPHA, DIGIT, SP, CR, LF, CRLF, are as defined
in the "core" syntax in Section 6 of RFC 5234 [7] or in the message
Mail-parameters  = esmtp-param *(SP esmtp-param)
Rcpt-parameters  = esmtp-param *(SP esmtp-param)
esmtp-param    = esmtp-keyword ["=" esmtp-value]
esmtp-keyword  = (ALPHA / DIGIT) *(ALPHA / DIGIT / "-")
; characters.  If this string is an email address,
sub-domain     = Let-dig [Ldh-str]
address-literal  = "[" ( IPv4-address-literal /
Mailbox        = Local-part "@" ( Domain / address-literal )
Local-part     = Dot-string / Quoted-string
Quoted-string  = DQUOTE *QcontentSMTP DQUOTE
QcontentSMTP   = qtextSMTP / quoted-pairSMTP
; without blackslash-quoting except
; double-quote and the backslash itself.
While the above definition for Local-part is relatively permissive,
for maximum interoperability, a host that expects to receive mail
SHOULD avoid defining mailboxes where the Local-part requires (or
uses) the Quoted-string form or where the Local-part is case-
sensitive.  For any purposes that require generating or comparing
Local-parts (e.g., to specific mailbox names), all quoted forms MUST
be treated as equivalent, and the sending system SHOULD transmit the
form that uses the minimum quoting possible.
Systems MUST NOT define mailboxes in such a way as to require the use
in SMTP of non-ASCII characters (octets with the high order bit set
to one) or ASCII "control characters" (decimal value 0-31 and 127).
These characters MUST NOT be used in MAIL or RCPT commands or other
commands that require mailbox names.
Note that the backslash, "\", is a quote character, which is used to
indicate that the next character is to be used literally (instead of
its normal interpretation).  For example, "Joe\,Smith" indicates a
single nine-character user name string with the comma being the
fourth character of that string.
To promote interoperability and consistent with long-standing
guidance about conservative use of the DNS in naming and applications
characters outside the set of alphabetic characters, digits, and
hyphen MUST NOT appear in domain name labels for SMTP clients or
servers.  In particular, the underscore character is not permitted.
SMTP servers that receive a command in which invalid character codes
have been employed, and for which there are no other reasons for
rejection, MUST reject that command with a 501 response (this rule,
like others, could be overridden by appropriate SMTP extensions).
Sometimes a host is not known to the domain name system and
communication (and, in particular, communication to report and repair
the error) is blocked.  To bypass this barrier, a special literal
form of the address is allowed as an alternative to a domain name.
For IPv4 addresses, this form uses four small decimal integers
separated by dots and enclosed by brackets such as [123.255.37.2],
which indicates an (IPv4) Internet Address in sequence-of-octets
form.  For IPv6 and other forms of addressing that might eventually
be standardized, the form consists of a standardized "tag" that
identifies the address syntax, a colon, and the address itself, in a
format specified as part of the relevant standards (i.e., RFC 4291
IPv4-address-literal  = Snum 3("."  Snum)
IPv6-address-literal  = "IPv6:" IPv6-addr
General-address-literal  = Standardized-tag ":" 1*dcontent
Standardized-tag  = Ldh-str
; Standards-Track RFC and registered with IANA
There are restrictions on the order in which these commands may be
A session that will contain mail transactions MUST first be
initialized by the use of the EHLO command.  An SMTP server SHOULD
accept commands for non-mail transactions (e.g., VRFY or EXPN)
without this initialization.
An EHLO command MAY be issued by a client later in the session.  If
it is issued after the session begins and the EHLO command is
acceptable to the SMTP server, the SMTP server MUST clear all buffers
and reset the state exactly as if a RSET command had been issued.  In
other words, the sequence of RSET followed immediately by EHLO is
redundant, but not harmful other than in the performance cost of
executing unnecessary commands.
If the EHLO command is not acceptable to the SMTP server, 501, 500,
502, or 550 failure replies MUST be returned as appropriate.  The
SMTP server MUST stay in the same state after transmitting these
replies that it was in before the EHLO was received.
The SMTP client MUST, if possible, ensure that the domain parameter
to the EHLO command is a primary host name as specified for this
command in Section 2.3.5.  If this is not possible (e.g., when the
client's address is dynamically assigned and the client does not have
an obvious name), an address literal SHOULD be substituted for the
An SMTP server MAY verify that the domain name argument in the EHLO
command actually corresponds to the IP address of the client.
However, if the verification fails, the server MUST NOT refuse to
accept a message on that basis.  Information captured in the
verification attempt is for logging and tracing purposes.  Note that
this prohibition applies to the matching of the parameter to its IP
address only; see Section 7.9 for a more extensive discussion of
rejecting incoming connections or mail messages.
The NOOP, HELP, EXPN, VRFY, and RSET commands can be used at any time
during a session, or without previously initializing a session.  SMTP
servers SHOULD process these normally (that is, not return a 503
code) even if no EHLO command has yet been received; clients SHOULD
open a session with EHLO before sending these commands.
If these rules are followed, the example in RFC 821 that shows "550
access denied to you" in response to an EXPN command is incorrect
unless an EHLO command precedes the EXPN or the denial of access is
based on the client's IP address or other authentication or
authorization-determining mechanisms.
The MAIL command (or the obsolete SEND, SOML, or SAML commands)
begins a mail transaction.  Once started, a mail transaction consists
of a transaction beginning command, one or more RCPT commands, and a
DATA command, in that order.  A mail transaction may be aborted by
the RSET, a new EHLO, or the QUIT command.  There may be zero or more
transactions in a session.  MAIL (or SEND, SOML, or SAML) MUST NOT be
sent if a mail transaction is already open, i.e., it should be sent
only if no mail transaction had been started in the session, or if
the previous one successfully concluded with a successful DATA
command, or if the previous one was aborted, e.g., with a RSET or new
If the transaction beginning command argument is not acceptable, a
the same state.  If the commands in a transaction are out of order to
the degree that they cannot be processed by the server, a 503 failure
reply MUST be returned and the SMTP server MUST stay in the same
The last command in a session MUST be the QUIT command.  The QUIT
command SHOULD be used by the client SMTP to request connection
closure, even when no session opening command was sent and accepted.
As specified in Section 2.2.2, commands starting in "X" may be used
by bilateral agreement between the client (sending) and server
(receiving) SMTP agents.  An SMTP server that does not recognize such
a command is expected to reply with "500 Command not recognized".  An
extended SMTP server MAY list the feature names associated with these
private commands in the response to the EHLO command.
Commands sent or accepted by SMTP systems that do not start with "X"
MUST conform to the requirements of Section 2.2.2.
Replies to SMTP commands serve to ensure the synchronization of
requests and actions in the process of mail transfer and to guarantee
that the SMTP client always knows the state of the SMTP server.
Every command MUST generate exactly one reply.
The details of the command-reply sequence are described in
An SMTP reply consists of a three digit number (transmitted as three
numeric characters) followed by some text unless specified otherwise
in this document.  The number is for use by automata to determine
what state to enter next; the text is for the human user.  The three
digits contain enough encoded information that the SMTP client need
not examine the text and may either discard it or pass it on to the
user, as appropriate.  Exceptions are as noted elsewhere in this
are associated with message text that must be parsed and interpreted
by machines.  In the general case, the text may be receiver dependent
and context dependent, so there are likely to be varying texts for
each reply code.  A discussion of the theory of reply codes is given
in Section 4.2.1.  Formally, a reply is defined to be the sequence: a
three-digit code, <SP>, one line of text, and <CRLF>, or a multiline
reply (as defined in the same section).  Since, in violation of this
specification, the text is sometimes not sent, clients that do not
receive it SHOULD be prepared to process the code alone (with or
without a trailing space character).  Only the EHLO, EXPN, and HELP
commands are expected to result in multiline replies in normal
circumstances; however, multiline replies are allowed for any
In ABNF, server responses are:
where "Greeting" appears only in the 220 response that announces that
the server is opening its part of the connection.  (Other possible
server responses upon connection follow the syntax of Reply-line.)
An SMTP server SHOULD send only the reply codes listed in this
document.  An SMTP server SHOULD use the text shown in the examples
An SMTP client MUST determine its actions only by the reply code, not
by the text (except for the "change of address" 251 and 551 and, if
necessary, 220, 221, and 421 replies); in the general case, any text,
including no text at all (although senders SHOULD NOT send bare
codes), MUST be acceptable.  The space (blank) following the reply
code is considered part of the text.  Whenever possible, a receiver-
SMTP SHOULD test the first digit (severity indication) of the reply
The list of codes that appears below MUST NOT be construed as
permanent.  While the addition of new codes should be a rare and
significant activity, with supplemental information in the textual
part of the response being preferred, new codes may be added as the
result of new Standards or Standards-Track specifications.
Consequently, a sender-SMTP MUST be prepared to handle codes not
specified in this document and MUST do so by interpreting the first
In the absence of extensions negotiated with the client, SMTP servers
MUST NOT send reply codes whose first digits are other than 2, 3, 4,
or 5.  Clients that receive such out-of-range codes SHOULD normally
treat them as fatal errors and terminate the mail transaction.
The three digits of the reply each have a special significance.  The
first digit denotes whether the response is good, bad, or incomplete.
An unsophisticated SMTP client, or one that receives an unexpected
code, will be able to determine its next action (proceed as planned,
redo, retrench, etc.) by examining this first digit.  An SMTP client
that wants to know approximately what kind of error occurred (e.g.,
mail system error, command syntax error) may examine the second
digit.  The third digit and any supplemental information that may be
present is reserved for the finest gradation of information.
There are four values for the first digit of the reply code:
2yz  Positive Completion reply
The requested action has been successfully completed.  A new
request may be initiated.
3yz  Positive Intermediate reply
The command has been accepted, but the requested action is being
held in abeyance, pending receipt of further information.  The
SMTP client should send another command specifying this
information.  This reply is used in command sequence groups (i.e.,
4yz  Transient Negative Completion reply
The command was not accepted, and the requested action did not
occur.  However, the error condition is temporary, and the action
may be requested again.  The sender should return to the beginning
of the command sequence (if any).  It is difficult to assign a
meaning to "transient" when two different sites (receiver- and
sender-SMTP agents) must agree on the interpretation.  Each reply
in this category might have a different time value, but the SMTP
client SHOULD try again.  A rule of thumb to determine whether a
reply fits into the 4yz or the 5yz category (see below) is that
replies are 4yz if they can be successful if repeated without any
change in command form or in properties of the sender or receiver
(that is, the command is repeated identically and the receiver
does not put up a new implementation).
5yz  Permanent Negative Completion reply
The command was not accepted and the requested action did not
occur.  The SMTP client SHOULD NOT repeat the exact request (in
the same sequence).  Even some "permanent" error conditions can be
corrected, so the human user may want to direct the SMTP client to
reinitiate the command sequence by direct action at some point in
the future (e.g., after the spelling has been changed, or the user
has altered the account status).
It is worth noting that the file transfer protocol (FTP) [34] uses a
very similar code architecture and that the SMTP codes are based on
the FTP model.  However, SMTP uses a one-command, one-response model
(while FTP is asynchronous) and FTP's 1yz codes are not part of the
The second digit encodes responses in specific categories:
x0z  Syntax: These replies refer to syntax errors, syntactically
correct commands that do not fit any functional category, and
unimplemented or superfluous commands.
x1z  Information: These are replies to requests for information, such
x2z  Connections: These are replies referring to the transmission
x5z  Mail system: These replies indicate the status of the receiver
mail system vis-a-vis the requested transfer or other mail system
The third digit gives a finer gradation of meaning in each category
specified by the second digit.  The list of replies illustrates this.
Each reply text is recommended rather than mandatory, and may even
change according to the command with which it is associated.  On the
other hand, the reply codes must strictly follow the specifications
in this section.  Receiver implementations should not invent new
codes for slightly different situations from the ones described here,
but rather adapt codes already defined.
For example, a command such as NOOP, whose successful execution does
not offer the SMTP client any new information, will return a 250
reply.  The reply is 502 when the command requests an unimplemented
non-site-specific action.  A refinement of that is the 504 reply for
a command that is implemented, but that requests an unimplemented
The reply text may be longer than a single line; in these cases the
complete text must be marked so the SMTP client knows when it can
stop reading the reply.  This requires a special format to indicate a
The format for multiline replies requires that every line, except the
last, begin with the reply code, followed immediately by a hyphen,
"-" (also known as minus), followed by text.  The last line will
begin with the reply code, followed immediately by <SP>, optionally
some text, and <CRLF>.  As noted above, servers SHOULD send the <SP>
if subsequent text is not sent, but clients MUST be prepared for it
250-234 Text beginning with numbers
In a multiline reply, the reply code on each of the lines MUST be the
same.  It is reasonable for the client to rely on this, so it can
make processing decisions based on the code in any line, assuming
that all others will be the same.  In a few cases, there is important
data for the client in the reply "text".  The client will be able to
identify these cases from the current context.
as command line too long)
meaning of a particular non-standard command; this reply is useful
(This may be a reply to any command if the service knows it must
mailbox busy or temporarily blocked for policy reasons)
not found, no access, or command rejected for policy reasons)
mailbox syntax incorrect)
response, "No SMTP service here")
Questions have been raised as to when reply code 502 (Command not
implemented) SHOULD be returned in preference to other codes. 502
SHOULD be used when the command is actually recognized by the SMTP
server, but not implemented.  If the command is not recognized, code
capabilities in response to EHLO for which they will return 502 (or
When an SMTP server returns a positive completion status (2yz code)
after the DATA command is completed with <CRLF>.<CRLF>, it accepts
o  delivering the message (if the recipient mailbox exists), or
o  if attempts to deliver the message fail due to transient
conditions, retrying delivery some reasonable number of times at
intervals as specified in Section 4.5.4.
o  if attempts to deliver the message fail due to permanent
conditions, or if repeated attempts to deliver the message fail
due to transient conditions, returning appropriate notification to
the sender of the original message (using the address in the SMTP
When an SMTP server returns a temporary error status (4yz) code after
the DATA command is completed with <CRLF>.<CRLF>, it MUST NOT make a
subsequent attempt to deliver that message.  The SMTP client retains
responsibility for the delivery of that message and may either return
it to the user or requeue it for a subsequent attempt (see
The user who originated the message SHOULD be able to interpret the
return of a transient failure status (by mail message or otherwise)
as a non-delivery indication, just as a permanent failure would be
interpreted.  If the client SMTP successfully handles these
conditions, the user will not receive such a reply.
When an SMTP server returns a permanent error status (5yz) code after
the DATA command is completed with <CRLF>.<CRLF>, it MUST NOT make
any subsequent attempt to deliver the message.  As with temporary
error status codes, the SMTP client retains responsibility for the
message, but SHOULD not again attempt delivery to the same server
without user review of the message and response and appropriate
The communication between the sender and receiver is an alternating
dialogue, controlled by the sender.  As such, the sender issues a
command and the receiver responds with a reply.  Unless other
arrangements are negotiated through service extensions, the sender
MUST wait for this response before sending further commands.  One
important reply is the connection greeting.  Normally, a receiver
will send a 220 "Service ready" reply when the connection is
completed.  The sender SHOULD wait for this greeting message before
Note: all the greeting-type replies have the official name (the
fully-qualified primary domain name) of the server host as the first
word following the reply code.  Sometimes the host will have no
meaningful name.  See Section 4.1.3 for a discussion of alternatives
each command.  These SHOULD be strictly adhered to.  A receiver MAY
substitute text in the replies, but the meanings and actions implied
by the code numbers and by the specific command reply sequence MUST
Each command is listed with its usual possible replies.  The prefixes
used before the possible replies are "I" for intermediate, "S" for
success, and "E" for error.  Since some servers may generate other
replies under special circumstances, and to allow for future
extension, SMTP clients SHOULD, when possible, interpret only the
first digit of the reply and MUST be prepared to deal with
unrecognized reply codes by interpreting the first digit only.
Unless extended using the mechanisms described in Section 2.2, SMTP
servers MUST NOT transmit reply codes to an SMTP client that are
other than three digits or that do not start in a digit between 2 and
These sequencing rules and, in principle, the codes themselves, can
be extended or modified by SMTP extensions offered by the server and
accepted (requested) by the client.  However, if the target is more
precise granularity in the codes, rather than codes for completely
new purposes, the system described in RFC 3463 [25] SHOULD be used in
preference to the invention of new codes.
In addition to the codes listed below, any SMTP command can return
any of the following codes if the corresponding unusual circumstances
not recognized.  Note that producing a "command not recognized"
error in response to the required subset of these commands is a
violation of this specification.  Similarly, producing a "command
too long" message for a command line shorter than 512 characters
would violate the provisions of Section 4.5.3.1.4.
future extensions, commands that are specified in this document as
not accepting arguments (DATA, RSET, QUIT) SHOULD return a 501
message if arguments are supplied in the absence of EHLO-
advertised extensions.
Specific sequences are:
E: 504 (a conforming implementation could return this code only
in fairly obscure cases), 550, 502 (permitted only with an old-
style server that does not support EHLO)
When an SMTP server receives a message for delivery or further
processing, it MUST insert trace ("time stamp" or "Received")
information at the beginning of the message content, as discussed in
This line MUST be structured as follows:
o  The FROM clause, which MUST be supplied in an SMTP environment,
SHOULD contain both (1) the name of the source host as presented
in the EHLO command and (2) an address literal containing the IP
address of the source, determined from the TCP connection.
o  The ID clause MAY contain an "@" as suggested in RFC 822, but this
o  If the FOR clause appears, it MUST contain exactly one <path>
entry, even when multiple RCPT commands have been given.  Multiple
<path>s raise some security issues and have been deprecated, see
An Internet mail program MUST NOT change or delete a Received: line
that was previously added to the message header section.  SMTP
servers MUST prepend Received lines to messages; they MUST NOT change
the order of existing lines or insert Received lines in any other
As the Internet grows, comparability of Received header fields is
important for detecting problems, especially slow relays.  SMTP
servers that create Received header fields SHOULD use explicit
offsets in the dates (e.g., -0800), rather than time zone names of
any type.  Local time (with an offset) SHOULD be used rather than UT
when feasible.  This formulation allows slightly more information
about local circumstances to be specified.  If UT is needed, the
receiver need merely do some simple arithmetic to convert the values.
Use of UT loses information about the time zone-location of the
server.  If it is desired to supply a time zone name, it SHOULD be
When the delivery SMTP server makes the "final delivery" of a
message, it inserts a return-path line at the beginning of the mail
data.  This use of return-path is required; mail systems MUST support
it.  The return-path line preserves the information in the <reverse-
path> from the MAIL command.  Here, final delivery means the message
has left the SMTP environment.  Normally, this would mean it had been
delivered to the destination user or an associated mail drop, but in
some cases it may be further processed and transmitted by another
It is possible for the mailbox in the return path to be different
from the actual sender's mailbox, for example, if error responses are
to be delivered to a special error handling mailbox rather than to
the message sender.  When mailing lists are involved, this
arrangement is common and useful as a means of directing errors to
the list maintainer rather than the message originator.
The text above implies that the final mail data will begin with a
return path line, followed by one or more time stamp lines.  These
lines will be followed by the rest of the mail data: first the
balance of the mail header section and then the body (RFC 5322 [4]).
It is sometimes difficult for an SMTP server to determine whether or
not it is making final delivery since forwarding or other operations
may occur after the message is accepted for delivery.  Consequently,
any further (forwarding, gateway, or relay) systems MAY remove the
return path and rebuild the MAIL command as needed to ensure that
exactly one such line appears in a delivered message.
A message-originating SMTP system SHOULD NOT send a message that
already contains a Return-path header field.  SMTP servers performing
a relay function MUST NOT inspect the message data, and especially
not to the extent needed to determine if Return-path header fields
are present.  SMTP servers making final delivery MAY remove Return-
path header fields before adding their own.
The primary purpose of the Return-path is to designate the address to
which messages indicating non-delivery or other mail system failures
are to be sent.  For this to be unambiguous, exactly one return path
SHOULD be present when the message is delivered.  Systems using RFC
address, associated with the transport envelope, to which error
reports (e.g., non-delivery messages) should be sent.
Historical note: Text in RFC 822 that appears to contradict the use
of the Return-path header field (or the envelope reverse-path address
from the MAIL command) as the destination for error messages is not
applicable on the Internet.  The reverse-path address (as copied into
the Return-path) MUST be used as the target of any mail containing
delivery error messages.
o  a gateway from SMTP -> elsewhere SHOULD insert a return-path
header field, unless it is known that the "elsewhere" transport
also uses Internet domain addresses and maintains the envelope
sender address separately.
o  a gateway from elsewhere -> SMTP SHOULD delete any return-path
header field present in the message, and either copy that
information to the SMTP envelope or combine it with information
present in the envelope of the other transport system to construct
the reverse-path argument to the MAIL command in the SMTP
The server must give special treatment to cases in which the
processing following the end of mail data indication is only
partially successful.  This could happen if, after accepting several
recipients and the mail data, the SMTP server finds that the mail
data could be successfully delivered to some, but not all, of the
recipients.  In such cases, the response to the DATA command MUST be
an OK reply.  However, the SMTP server MUST compose and send an
"undeliverable mail" notification message to the originator of the
A single notification listing all of the failed recipients or
separate notification messages MUST be sent for each failed
recipient.  For economy of processing by the sender, the former
SHOULD be used when possible.  Note that the key difference between
handling aliases (Section 3.9.1) and forwarding (this subsection) is
the change to the backward-pointing address in this case.  All
notification messages about undeliverable mail MUST be sent using the
MAIL command (even if they result from processing the obsolete SEND,
SOML, or SAML commands) and MUST use a null return path as discussed
The time stamp line and the return path line are formally defined as
follows (the definitions for "FWS" and "CFWS" appear in RFC 5322
Return-path-line  = "Return-Path:" FWS Reverse-path <CRLF>
Time-stamp-line  = "Received:" FWS Stamp <CRLF>
Stamp          = From-domain By-domain Opt-info [CFWS] ";"
; years, are prohibited in SMTP and MUST NOT be used.
From-domain    = "FROM" FWS Extended-Domain
By-domain      = CFWS "BY" FWS Extended-Domain
Extended-Domain  = Domain /
TCP-info       = address-literal / ( Domain FWS address-literal )
; Information derived by server from TCP connection
[Additional-Registered-Clauses]
Additional-Registered-Clauses  = CFWS Atom FWS String
; Additional standard names for links are
; registered with the Internet Assigned Numbers
; with non-Internet transports.  SMTP servers
Protocol       = "ESMTP" / "SMTP" / Attdl-Protocol
; Additional standard names for protocols are
In order to make SMTP workable, the following minimum implementation
MUST be provided by all receivers.  The following commands MUST be
supported to conform to this specification:
Any system that includes an SMTP server supporting mail relaying or
delivery MUST support the reserved mailbox "postmaster" as a case-
insensitive local name.  This postmaster address is not strictly
necessary if the server always returns 554 on connection opening (as
described in Section 3.1).  The requirement to accept mail for
postmaster implies that RCPT commands that specify a mailbox for
postmaster at any of the domains for which the SMTP server provides
mail service, as well as the special case of "RCPT TO:<Postmaster>"
(with no domain specification), MUST be supported.
SMTP systems are expected to make every reasonable effort to accept
mail directed to Postmaster from any other system on the Internet.
In extreme cases -- such as to contain a denial of service attack or
other breach of security -- an SMTP server may block mail directed to
Postmaster.  However, such arrangements SHOULD be narrowly tailored
so as to avoid blocking messages that are not part of such attacks.
Without some provision for data transparency, the character sequence
"<CRLF>.<CRLF>" ends the mail text and cannot be sent by the user.
In general, users are not aware of such "forbidden" sequences.  To
allow all user composed text to be transmitted transparently, the
following procedures are used:
o  Before sending a line of mail text, the SMTP client checks the
first character of the line.  If it is a period, one additional
period is inserted at the beginning of the line.
o  When a line of mail text is received by the SMTP server, it checks
the line.  If the line is composed of a single period, it is
treated as the end of mail indicator.  If the first character is a
period and there are other characters on the line, the first
The mail data may contain any of the 128 ASCII characters.  All
characters are to be delivered to the recipient's mailbox, including
spaces, vertical and horizontal tabs, and other control characters.
If the transmission channel provides an 8-bit byte (octet) data
stream, the 7-bit ASCII codes are transmitted, right justified, in
the octets, with the high-order bits cleared to zero.  See
Section 3.6 for special treatment of these conditions in SMTP systems
serving a relay function.
In some systems, it may be necessary to transform the data as it is
received and stored.  This may be necessary for hosts that use a
different character set than ASCII as their local character set, that
store data in records rather than strings, or which use special
character sequences as delimiters inside mailboxes.  If such
transformations are necessary, they MUST be reversible, especially if
they are applied to mail being relayed.
There are several objects that have required minimum/maximum sizes.
Every implementation MUST be able to receive objects of at least
these sizes.  Objects larger than these sizes SHOULD be avoided when
possible.  However, some Internet mail constructs such as encoded
X.400 addresses (RFC 2156 [35]) will often require larger objects.
Clients MAY attempt to transmit these, but MUST be prepared for a
server to reject them if they cannot be handled by it.  To the
maximum extent possible, implementation techniques that impose no
limits on the length of these objects should be used.
Extensions to SMTP may involve the use of characters that occupy more
than a single octet each.  This section therefore specifies lengths
in octets where absolute lengths, rather than character counts, are
The maximum total length of a user name or other local-part is 64
The maximum total length of a domain name or number is 255 octets.
The maximum total length of a reverse-path or forward-path is 256
octets (including the punctuation and element separators).
The maximum total length of a command line including the command word
and the <CRLF> is 512 octets.  SMTP extensions may be used to
The maximum total length of a reply line including the reply code and
the <CRLF> is 512 octets.  More information may be conveyed through
The maximum total length of a text line including the <CRLF> is 1000
octets (not counting the leading dot duplicated for transparency).
This number may be increased by the use of SMTP Service Extensions.
The maximum total length of a message content (including any message
header section as well as the message body) MUST BE at least 64K
octets.  Since the introduction of Internet Standards for multimedia
mail (RFC 2045 [21]), message lengths on the Internet have grown
dramatically, and message size restrictions should be avoided if at
all possible.  SMTP server systems that must impose restrictions
SHOULD implement the "SIZE" service extension of RFC 1870 [10], and
SMTP client systems that will send large messages SHOULD utilize it
The minimum total number of recipients that MUST be buffered is 100
recipients.  Rejection of messages (for excessive recipients) with
fewer than 100 RCPT commands is a violation of this specification.
The general principle that relaying SMTP server MUST NOT, and
delivery SMTP servers SHOULD NOT, perform validation tests on message
header fields suggests that messages SHOULD NOT be rejected based on
the total number of recipients shown in header fields.  A server that
imposes a limit on the number of recipients MUST behave in an orderly
fashion, such as rejecting additional addresses over its limit rather
than silently discarding addresses previously accepted.  A client
that needs to deliver a message containing over 100 RCPT commands
SHOULD be prepared to transmit in 100-recipient "chunks" if the
server declines to accept more than 100 recipients in a single
Errors due to exceeding these limits may be reported by using the
reply codes.  Some examples of reply codes are:
RFC 821 [1] incorrectly listed the error where an SMTP server
exhausts its implementation limit on the number of RCPT commands
("too many recipients") as having reply code 552.  The correct reply
code for this condition is 452.  Clients SHOULD treat a 552 code in
this case as a temporary, rather than permanent, failure so the logic
When a conforming SMTP server encounters this condition, it has at
least 100 successful RCPT commands in its recipients buffer.  If the
server is able to accept the message, then at least these 100
addresses will be removed from the SMTP client's queue.  When the
client attempts retransmission of those addresses that received 452
responses, at least 100 of these will be able to fit in the SMTP
server's recipients buffer.  Each retransmission attempt that is able
to deliver anything will be able to dispose of at least 100 of these
If an SMTP server has an implementation limit on the number of RCPT
commands and this limit is exhausted, it MUST use a response code of
above).  If the server has a configured site-policy limitation on the
number of RCPT commands, it MAY instead use a 5yz response code.  In
particular, if the intent is to prohibit messages with more than a
site-specified number of recipients, rather than merely limit the
number of recipients in a given mail transaction, it would be
reasonable to return a 503 response to any DATA command received
subsequent to the 452 (or 552) code or to simply return the 503 after
DATA without returning any previous negative response.
An SMTP client MUST provide a timeout mechanism.  It MUST use per-
command timeouts rather than somehow trying to time the entire mail
transaction.  Timeouts SHOULD be easily reconfigurable, preferably
without recompiling the SMTP code.  To implement this, a timer is set
for each SMTP command and for each buffer of the data transfer.  The
latter means that the overall timeout is inherently proportional to
Based on extensive experience with busy mail-relay hosts, the minimum
per-command timeout values SHOULD be as follows:
An SMTP client process needs to distinguish between a failed TCP
connection and a delay in receiving the initial 220 greeting message.
Many SMTP servers accept a TCP connection but delay delivery of the
A longer timeout is required if processing of mailing lists and
aliases is not deferred until after the message was accepted.
This is while awaiting the "354 Start Input" reply to a DATA command.
This is while awaiting the completion of each TCP SEND call
transmitting a chunk of data.
This is while awaiting the "250 OK" reply.  When the receiver gets
the final period terminating the message data, it typically performs
processing to deliver the message to a user mailbox.  A spurious
timeout at this point would be very wasteful and would typically
result in delivery of multiple copies of the message, since it has
been successfully sent and the server has accepted responsibility for
delivery.  See Section 6.1 for additional discussion.
An SMTP server SHOULD have a timeout of at least 5 minutes while it
is awaiting the next command from the sender.
The common structure of a host SMTP implementation includes user
mailboxes, one or more areas for queuing messages in transit, and one
or more daemon processes for sending and receiving mail.  The exact
structure will vary depending on the needs of the users on the host
and the number and size of mailing lists supported by the host.  We
describe several optimizations that have proved helpful, particularly
for mailers supporting high traffic levels.
Any queuing strategy MUST include timeouts on all activities on a
per-command basis.  A queuing strategy MUST NOT send error messages
in response to error messages under any circumstances.
The general model for an SMTP client is one or more processes that
periodically attempt to transmit outgoing mail.  In a typical system,
the program that composes a message has some method for requesting
immediate attention for a new piece of outgoing mail, while mail that
cannot be transmitted immediately MUST be queued and periodically
retried by the sender.  A mail queue entry will include not only the
message itself but also the envelope information.
The sender MUST delay retrying a particular destination after one
attempt has failed.  In general, the retry interval SHOULD be at
least 30 minutes; however, more sophisticated and variable strategies
will be beneficial when the SMTP client can determine the reason for
Retries continue until the message is transmitted or the sender gives
up; the give-up time generally needs to be at least 4-5 days.  It MAY
be appropriate to set a shorter maximum number of retries for non-
delivery notifications and equivalent error messages than for
standard messages.  The parameters to the retry algorithm MUST be
A client SHOULD keep a list of hosts it cannot reach and
corresponding connection timeouts, rather than just retrying queued
Experience suggests that failures are typically transient (the target
system or its connection has crashed), favoring a policy of two
connection attempts in the first hour the message is in the queue,
and then backing off to one every two or three hours.
The SMTP client can shorten the queuing delay in cooperation with the
SMTP server.  For example, if mail is received from a particular
address, it is likely that mail queued for that host can now be sent.
Application of this principle may, in many cases, eliminate the
requirement for an explicit "send queues now" function such as ETRN,
The strategy may be further modified as a result of multiple
addresses per host (see below) to optimize delivery time versus
An SMTP client may have a large queue of messages for each
unavailable destination host.  If all of these messages were retried
in every retry cycle, there would be excessive Internet overhead and
the sending system would be blocked for a long period.  Note that an
SMTP client can generally determine that a delivery attempt has
failed only after a timeout of several minutes, and even a one-minute
timeout per connection will result in a very large delay if retries
are repeated for dozens, or even hundreds, of queued messages to the
At the same time, SMTP clients SHOULD use great care in caching
negative responses from servers.  In an extreme case, if EHLO is
issued multiple times during the same SMTP connection, different
answers may be returned by the server.  More significantly, 5yz
responses to the MAIL command MUST NOT be cached.
When a mail message is to be delivered to multiple recipients, and
the SMTP server to which a copy of the message is to be sent is the
same for multiple recipients, then only one copy of the message
SHOULD be transmitted.  That is, the SMTP client SHOULD use the
command sequence: MAIL, RCPT, RCPT, ..., RCPT, DATA instead of the
sequence: MAIL, RCPT, DATA, ..., MAIL, RCPT, DATA.  However, if there
are very many addresses, a limit on the number of RCPT commands per
MAIL command MAY be imposed.  This efficiency feature SHOULD be
Similarly, to achieve timely delivery, the SMTP client MAY support
multiple concurrent outgoing mail transactions.  However, some limit
may be appropriate to protect the host from devoting all its
The SMTP server SHOULD attempt to keep a pending listen on the SMTP
port (specified by IANA as port 25) at all times.  This requires the
support of multiple incoming TCP connections for SMTP.  Some limit
MAY be imposed, but servers that cannot handle more than one SMTP
transaction at a time are not in conformance with the intent of this
As discussed above, when the SMTP server receives mail from a
particular host address, it could activate its own SMTP queuing
mechanisms to retry any mail pending for that host address.
There are several types of notification messages that are required by
existing and proposed Standards to be sent with a null reverse-path,
namely non-delivery notifications as discussed in Section 3.7, other
kinds of Delivery Status Notifications (DSNs, RFC 3461 [32]), and
Message Disposition Notifications (MDNs, RFC 3798 [37]).  All of
these kinds of messages are notifications about a previous message,
and they are sent to the reverse-path of the previous mail message.
(If the delivery of such a notification message fails, that usually
indicates a problem with the mail system of the host to which the
notification message is addressed.  For this reason, at some hosts
the MTA is set up to forward such failed notification messages to
someone who is able to fix problems with the mail system, e.g., via
All other types of messages (i.e., any message which is not required
by a Standards-Track RFC to have a null reverse-path) SHOULD be sent
with a valid, non-null reverse-path.
Implementers of automated email processors should be careful to make
sure that the various kinds of messages with a null reverse-path are
handled correctly.  In particular, such systems SHOULD NOT reply to
messages with a null reverse-path, and they SHOULD NOT add a non-null
reverse-path, or change a null reverse-path to a non-null one, to
such messages when forwarding.
Once an SMTP client lexically identifies a domain to which mail will
be delivered for processing (as described in Sections 2.3.5 and 3.6),
a DNS lookup MUST be performed to resolve the domain name (RFC 1035
[2]).  The names are expected to be fully-qualified domain names
(FQDNs): mechanisms for inferring FQDNs from partial names or local
aliases are outside of this specification.  Due to a history of
problems, SMTP servers used for initial submission of messages SHOULD
NOT make such inferences (Message Submission Servers [18] have
somewhat more flexibility) and intermediate (relay) SMTP servers MUST
The lookup first attempts to locate an MX record associated with the
name.  If a CNAME record is found, the resulting name is processed as
if it were the initial name.  If a non-existent domain error is
returned, this situation MUST be reported as an error.  If a
temporary error is returned, the message MUST be queued and retried
later (see Section 4.5.4.1).  If an empty list of MXs is returned,
the address is treated as if it was associated with an implicit MX
RR, with a preference of 0, pointing to that host.  If MX records are
present, but none of them are usable, or the implicit MX is unusable,
this situation MUST be reported as an error.
If one or more MX RRs are found for a given name, SMTP systems MUST
NOT utilize any address RRs associated with that name unless they are
located using the MX RRs; the "implicit MX" rule above applies only
if there are no MX records present.  If MX records are present, but
none of them are usable, this situation MUST be reported as an error.
When a domain name associated with an MX RR is looked up and the
associated data field obtained, the data field of that response MUST
contain a domain name.  That domain name, when queried, MUST return
at least one address record (e.g., A or AAAA RR) that gives the IP
address of the SMTP server to which the message should be directed.
Any other response, specifically including a value that will return a
CNAME record when queried, lies outside the scope of this Standard.
The prohibition on labels in the data that resolve to CNAMEs is
discussed in more detail in RFC 2181, Section 10.3 [38].
When the lookup succeeds, the mapping can result in a list of
alternative delivery addresses rather than a single address, because
of multiple MX records, multihoming, or both.  To provide reliable
mail transmission, the SMTP client MUST be able to try (and retry)
each of the relevant addresses in this list in order, until a
delivery attempt succeeds.  However, there MAY also be a configurable
limit on the number of alternate addresses that can be tried.  In any
case, the SMTP client SHOULD try at least two addresses.
Two types of information are used to rank the host addresses:
multiple MX records, and multihomed hosts.
MX records contain a preference indication that MUST be used in
sorting if more than one such record appears (see below).  Lower
numbers are more preferred than higher ones.  If there are multiple
destinations with the same preference and there is no clear reason to
favor one (e.g., by recognition of an easily reached address), then
the sender-SMTP MUST randomize them to spread the load across
multiple mail exchangers for a specific organization.
The destination host (perhaps taken from the preferred MX record) may
be multihomed, in which case the domain name resolver will return a
list of alternative IP addresses.  It is the responsibility of the
domain name resolver interface to have ordered this list by
decreasing preference if necessary, and the SMTP sender MUST try them
Although the capability to try multiple alternative addresses is
required, specific installations may want to limit or disable the use
of alternative addresses.  The question of whether a sender should
attempt retries using the different addresses of a multihomed host
has been controversial.  The main argument for using the multiple
addresses is that it maximizes the probability of timely delivery,
and indeed sometimes the probability of any delivery; the counter-
argument is that it may result in unnecessary resource use.  Note
that resource use is also strongly determined by the sending strategy
If an SMTP server receives a message with a destination for which it
is a designated Mail eXchanger, it MAY relay the message (potentially
after having rewritten the MAIL FROM and/or RCPT TO addresses), make
final delivery of the message, or hand it off using some mechanism
outside the SMTP-provided transport environment.  Of course, neither
of the latter require that the list of MX records be examined
If it determines that it should relay the message without rewriting
the address, it MUST sort the MX records to determine candidates for
delivery.  The records are first ordered by preference, with the
lowest-numbered records being most preferred.  The relay host MUST
then inspect the list for any of the names or addresses by which it
might be known in mail transactions.  If a matching record is found,
all records at that preference level and higher-numbered ones MUST be
discarded from consideration.  If there are no records left at that
point, it is an error condition, and the message MUST be returned as
undeliverable.  If records do remain, they SHOULD be tried, best
preference first, as described above.
In the contemporary Internet, SMTP clients and servers may be hosted
on IPv4 systems, IPv6 systems, or dual-stack systems that are
compatible with either version of the Internet Protocol.  The host
domains to which MX records point may, consequently, contain "A RR"s
(IPv4), "AAAA RR"s (IPv6), or any combination of them.  While RFC
environments, it was not comprehensive enough to justify
standardization, and some of its recommendations appear to be
inconsistent with this specification.  The appropriate actions to be
taken either will depend on local circumstances, such as performance
of the relevant networks and any conversions that might be necessary,
or will be obvious (e.g., an IPv6-only client need not attempt to
look up A RRs or attempt to reach IPv4-only servers).  Designers of
SMTP implementations that might run in IPv6 or dual-stack
environments should study the procedures above, especially the
comments about multihomed hosts, and, preferably, provide mechanisms
to facilitate operational tuning and mail interoperability between
IPv4 and IPv6 systems while considering local circumstances.
When the receiver-SMTP accepts a piece of mail (by sending a "250 OK"
message in response to DATA), it is accepting responsibility for
delivering or relaying the message.  It must take this responsibility
seriously.  It MUST NOT lose the message for frivolous reasons, such
as because the host later crashes or because of a predictable
resource shortage.  Some reasons that are not considered frivolous
are discussed in the next subsection and in Section 7.8.
If there is a delivery failure after acceptance of a message, the
receiver-SMTP MUST formulate and mail a notification message.  This
notification MUST be sent using a null ("<>") reverse-path in the
envelope.  The recipient of this notification MUST be the address
from the envelope return path (or the Return-Path: line).  However,
if this address is null ("<>"), the receiver-SMTP MUST NOT send a
notification.  Obviously, nothing in this section can or should
prohibit local decisions (i.e., as part of the same system
environment as the receiver-SMTP) to log or otherwise transmit
information about null address events locally if that is desired.  If
the address is an explicit source route, it MUST be stripped down to
For example, suppose that an error notification must be sent for a
message that arrived with:
The notification message MUST be sent using:
Some delivery failures after the message is accepted by SMTP will be
unavoidable.  For example, it may be impossible for the receiving
SMTP server to validate all the delivery addresses in RCPT command(s)
due to a "soft" domain system error, because the target is a mailing
list (see earlier discussion of RCPT), or because the server is
acting as a relay and has no immediate access to the delivering
To avoid receiving duplicate messages as the result of timeouts, a
receiver-SMTP MUST seek to minimize the time required to respond to
the final <CRLF>.<CRLF> end of data indicator.  See RFC 1047 [40] for
a discussion of this problem.
Utility and predictability of the Internet mail system requires that
messages that can be delivered should be delivered, regardless of any
syntax or other faults associated with those messages and regardless
of their content.  If they cannot be delivered, and cannot be
rejected by the SMTP server during the SMTP transaction, they should
be "bounced" (returned with non-delivery notification messages) as
described above.  In today's world, in which many SMTP server
operators have discovered that the quantity of undesirable bulk email
vastly exceeds the quantity of desired mail and in which accepting a
message may trigger additional undesirable traffic by providing
verification of the address, those principles may not be practical.
As discussed in Section 7.8 and Section 7.9 below, dropping mail
without notification of the sender is permitted in practice.
However, it is extremely dangerous and violates a long tradition and
community expectations that mail is either delivered or returned.  If
silent message-dropping is misused, it could easily undermine
confidence in the reliability of the Internet's mail systems.  So
silent dropping of messages should be considered only in those cases
where there is very high confidence that the messages are seriously
fraudulent or otherwise inappropriate.
To stretch the principle of delivery if possible even further, it may
be a rational policy to not deliver mail that has an invalid return
address, although the history of the network is that users are
typically better served by delivering any message that can be
delivered.  Reliably determining that a return address is invalid can
be a difficult and time-consuming process, especially if the putative
sending system is not directly accessible or does not fully and
accurately support VRFY and, even if a "drop messages with invalid
return addresses" policy is adopted, it SHOULD be applied only when
there is near-certainty that the return addresses are, in fact,
Conversely, if a message is rejected because it is found to contain
hostile content (a decision that is outside the scope of an SMTP
server as defined in this document), rejection ("bounce") messages
SHOULD NOT be sent unless the receiving site is confident that those
messages will be usefully delivered.  The preference and default in
these cases is to avoid sending non-delivery messages when the
incoming message is determined to contain hostile content.
Simple counting of the number of "Received:" header fields in a
message has proven to be an effective, although rarely optimal,
method of detecting loops in mail systems.  SMTP servers using this
technique SHOULD use a large rejection threshold, normally at least
contain provisions for detecting and stopping trivial loops.
Unfortunately, variations, creative interpretations, and outright
violations of Internet mail protocols do occur; some would suggest
that they occur quite frequently.  The debate as to whether a well-
behaved SMTP receiver or relay should reject a malformed message,
attempt to pass it on unchanged, or attempt to repair it to increase
the odds of successful delivery (or subsequent reply) began almost
with the dawn of structured network mail and shows no signs of
abating.  Advocates of rejection claim that attempted repairs are
rarely completely adequate and that rejection of bad messages is the
only way to get the offending software repaired.  Advocates of
"repair" or "deliver no matter what" argue that users prefer that
mail go through it if at all possible and that there are significant
market pressures in that direction.  In practice, these market
pressures may be more important to particular vendors than strict
conformance to the standards, regardless of the preference of the
The problems associated with ill-formed messages were exacerbated by
the introduction of the split-UA mail reading protocols (Post Office
Protocol (POP) version 2 [15], Post Office Protocol (POP) version 3
encouraged the use of SMTP as a posting (message submission)
protocol, and SMTP servers as relay systems for these client hosts
(which are often only intermittently connected to the Internet).
Historically, many of those client machines lacked some of the
mechanisms and information assumed by SMTP (and indeed, by the mail
format protocol, RFC 822 [28]).  Some could not keep adequate track
of time; others had no concept of time zones; still others could not
identify their own names or addresses; and, of course, none could
satisfy the assumptions that underlay RFC 822's conception of
authenticated addresses.
In response to these weak SMTP clients, many SMTP systems now
complete messages that are delivered to them in incomplete or
incorrect form.  This strategy is generally considered appropriate
when the server can identify or authenticate the client, and there
are prior agreements between them.  By contrast, there is at best
great concern about fixes applied by a relay or delivery SMTP server
that has little or no knowledge of the user or client machine.  Many
of these issues are addressed by using a separate protocol, such as
that defined in RFC 4409 [18], for message submission, rather than
using originating SMTP servers for that purpose.
The following changes to a message being processed MAY be applied
when necessary by an originating SMTP server, or one used as the
target of SMTP as an initial posting (message submission) protocol:
o  Addition of a message-id field when none appears
o  Addition of a date, time, or time zone when none appears
o  Correction of addresses to proper FQDN format
The less information the server has about the client, the less likely
these changes are to be correct and the more caution and conservatism
should be applied when considering whether or not to perform fixes
and how.  These changes MUST NOT be applied by an SMTP server that
provides an intermediate relay function.
In all cases, properly operating clients supplying correct
information are preferred to corrections by the SMTP server.  In all
cases, documentation SHOULD be provided in trace header fields and/or
header field comments for actions performed by the servers.
SMTP mail is inherently insecure in that it is feasible for even
fairly casual users to negotiate directly with receiving and relaying
SMTP servers and create messages that will trick a naive recipient
into believing that they came from somewhere else.  Constructing such
a message so that the "spoofed" behavior cannot be detected by an
expert is somewhat more difficult, but not sufficiently so as to be a
deterrent to someone who is determined and knowledgeable.
Consequently, as knowledge of Internet mail increases, so does the
knowledge that SMTP mail inherently cannot be authenticated, or
integrity checks provided, at the transport level.  Real mail
security lies only in end-to-end methods involving the message
bodies, such as those that use digital signatures (see RFC 1847 [43]
and, e.g., Pretty Good Privacy (PGP) in RFC 4880 [44] or Secure/
Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions (S/MIME) in RFC 3851 [45]).
Various protocol extensions and configuration options that provide
authentication at the transport level (e.g., from an SMTP client to
an SMTP server) improve somewhat on the traditional situation
described above.  However, in general, they only authenticate one
server to another rather than a chain of relays and servers, much
less authenticating users or user machines.  Consequently, unless
they are accompanied by careful handoffs of responsibility in a
carefully designed trust environment, they remain inherently weaker
than end-to-end mechanisms that use digitally signed messages rather
than depending on the integrity of the transport system.
Efforts to make it more difficult for users to set envelope return
path and header "From" fields to point to valid addresses other than
their own are largely misguided: they frustrate legitimate
applications in which mail is sent by one user on behalf of another,
in which error (or normal) replies should be directed to a special
address, or in which a single message is sent to multiple recipients
on different hosts.  (Systems that provide convenient ways for users
to alter these header fields on a per-message basis should attempt to
establish a primary and permanent mailbox address for the user so
that Sender header fields within the message data can be generated
This specification does not further address the authentication issues
associated with SMTP other than to advocate that useful functionality
not be disabled in the hope of providing some small margin of
protection against a user who is trying to fake mail.
Addresses that do not appear in the message header section may appear
in the RCPT commands to an SMTP server for a number of reasons.  The
two most common involve the use of a mailing address as a "list
exploder" (a single address that resolves into multiple addresses)
and the appearance of "blind copies".  Especially when more than one
RCPT command is present, and in order to avoid defeating some of the
purpose of these mechanisms, SMTP clients and servers SHOULD NOT copy
the full set of RCPT command arguments into the header section,
either as part of trace header fields or as informational or private-
extension header fields.  Since this rule is often violated in
practice, and cannot be enforced, sending SMTP systems that are aware
of "bcc" use MAY find it helpful to send each blind copy as a
separate message transaction containing only a single RCPT command.
There is no inherent relationship between either "reverse" (from
MAIL, SAML, etc., commands) or "forward" (RCPT) addresses in the SMTP
transaction ("envelope") and the addresses in the header section.
Receiving systems SHOULD NOT attempt to deduce such relationships and
use them to alter the header section of the message for delivery.
The popular "Apparently-to" header field is a violation of this
principle as well as a common source of unintended information
disclosure and SHOULD NOT be used.
As discussed in Section 3.5, individual sites may want to disable
either or both of VRFY or EXPN for security reasons (see below).  As
a corollary to the above, implementations that permit this MUST NOT
appear to have verified addresses that are not, in fact, verified.
If a site disables these commands for security reasons, the SMTP
server MUST return a 252 response, rather than a code that could be
confused with successful or unsuccessful verification.
Returning a 250 reply code with the address listed in the VRFY
command after having checked it only for syntax violates this rule.
Of course, an implementation that "supports" VRFY by always returning
On the public Internet, the contents of mailing lists have become
popular as an address information source for so-called "spammers."
The use of EXPN to "harvest" addresses has increased as list
administrators have installed protections against inappropriate uses
of the lists themselves.  However, VRFY and EXPN are still useful for
authenticated users and within an administrative domain.  For
example, VRFY and EXPN are useful for performing internal audits of
how email gets routed to check and to make sure no one is
automatically forwarding sensitive mail outside the organization.
Sites implementing SMTP authentication may choose to make VRFY and
EXPN available only to authenticated requestors.  Implementations
SHOULD still provide support for EXPN, but sites SHOULD carefully
evaluate the tradeoffs.
Whether disabling VRFY provides any real marginal security depends on
a series of other conditions.  In many cases, RCPT commands can be
used to obtain the same information about address validity.  On the
other hand, especially in situations where determination of address
validity for RCPT commands is deferred until after the DATA command
is received, RCPT may return no information at all, while VRFY is
expected to make a serious attempt to determine validity before
generating a response code (see discussion above).
Before a client uses the 251 or 551 reply codes from a RCPT command
to automatically update its future behavior (e.g., updating the
user's address book), it should be certain of the server's
authenticity.  If it does not, it may be subject to a man in the
There has been an ongoing debate about the tradeoffs between the
debugging advantages of announcing server type and version (and,
sometimes, even server domain name) in the greeting response or in
response to the HELP command and the disadvantages of exposing
information that might be useful in a potential hostile attack.  The
utility of the debugging information is beyond doubt.  Those who
argue for making it available point out that it is far better to
actually secure an SMTP server rather than hope that trying to
conceal known vulnerabilities by hiding the server's precise identity
will provide more protection.  Sites are encouraged to evaluate the
tradeoff with that issue in mind; implementations SHOULD minimally
provide for making type and version information available in some way
In some circumstances, such as when mail originates from within a LAN
whose hosts are not directly on the public Internet, trace
("Received") header fields produced in conformance with this
specification may disclose host names and similar information that
would not normally be available.  This ordinarily does not pose a
problem, but sites with special concerns about name disclosure should
be aware of it.  Also, the optional FOR clause should be supplied
with caution or not at all when multiple recipients are involved lest
it inadvertently disclose the identities of "blind copy" recipients
As discussed in Section 3.4, use of the 251 or 551 reply codes to
identify the replacement address associated with a mailbox may
inadvertently disclose sensitive information.  Sites that are
concerned about those issues should ensure that they select and
configure servers appropriately.
In recent years, there has been an increase of attacks on SMTP
servers, either in conjunction with attempts to discover addresses
for sending unsolicited messages or simply to make the servers
inaccessible to others (i.e., as an application-level denial of
service attack).  While the means of doing so are beyond the scope of
this Standard, rational operational behavior requires that servers be
permitted to detect such attacks and take action to defend
themselves.  For example, if a server determines that a large number
of RCPT TO commands are being sent, most or all with invalid
addresses, as part of such an attack, it would be reasonable for the
server to close the connection after generating an appropriate number
It is a well-established principle that an SMTP server may refuse to
accept mail for any operational or technical reason that makes sense
to the site providing the server.  However, cooperation among sites
and installations makes the Internet possible.  If sites take
excessive advantage of the right to reject traffic, the ubiquity of
email availability (one of the strengths of the Internet) will be
threatened; considerable care should be taken and balance maintained
if a site decides to be selective about the traffic it will accept
In recent years, use of the relay function through arbitrary sites
has been used as part of hostile efforts to hide the actual origins
of mail.  Some sites have decided to limit the use of the relay
function to known or identifiable sources, and implementations SHOULD
provide the capability to perform this type of filtering.  When mail
is rejected for these or other policy reasons, a 550 code SHOULD be
used in response to EHLO (or HELO), MAIL, or RCPT as appropriate.
IANA maintains three registries in support of this specification, all
of which were created for RFC 2821 or earlier.  This document expands
the third one as specified below.  The registry references listed are
as of the time of publication; IANA does not guarantee the locations
associated with the URLs.  The registries are as follows:
o  The first, "Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP) Service
Extensions" [46], consists of SMTP service extensions with the
associated keywords, and, as needed, parameters and verbs.  As
specified in Section 2.2.2, no entry may be made in this registry
that starts in an "X".  Entries may be made only for service
extensions (and associated keywords, parameters, or verbs) that
are defined in Standards-Track or Experimental RFCs specifically
approved by the IESG for this purpose.
o  The second registry, "Address Literal Tags" [47], consists of
"tags" that identify forms of domain literals other than those for
IPv4 addresses (specified in RFC 821 and in this document).  The
initial entry in that registry is for IPv6 addresses (specified in
this document).  Additional literal types require standardization
before being used; none are anticipated at this time.
o  The third, "Mail Transmission Types" [46], established by RFC 821
and renewed by this specification, is a registry of link and
protocol identifiers to be used with the "via" and "with"
subclauses of the time stamp ("Received:" header field) described
in Section 4.4.  Link and protocol identifiers in addition to
those specified in this document may be registered only by
standardization or by way of an RFC-documented, IESG-approved,
Experimental protocol extension.  This name space is for
identification and not limited in size: the IESG is encouraged to
approve on the basis of clear documentation and a distinct method
rather than preferences about the properties of the method itself.
An additional subsection has been added to the "VIA link types"
and "WITH protocol types" subsections of this registry to contain
registrations of "Additional-registered-clauses" as described
above.  The registry will contain clause names, a description, a
summary of the syntax of the associated String, and a reference.
As new clauses are defined, they may, in principle, specify
creation of their own registries if the Strings consist of
reserved terms or keywords rather than less restricted strings.
As with link and protocol identifiers, additional clauses may be
registered only by standardization or by way of an RFC-documented,
IESG-approved, Experimental protocol extension.  The additional
clause name space is for identification and is not limited in
size: the IESG is encouraged to approve on the basis of clear
documentation, actual use or strong signs that the clause will be
used, and a distinct requirement rather than preferences about the
properties of the clause itself.
In addition, if additional trace header fields (i.e., in addition to
Return-path and Received) are ever created, those trace fields MUST
be added to the IANA registry established by BCP 90 (RFC 3864) [11]
Many people contributed to the development of RFC 2821.  That
document should be consulted for those acknowledgments.  For the
present document, the editor and the community owe thanks to Dawn
Mann and Tony Hansen who assisted in the very painful process of
editing and converting the internal format of the document from one
Neither this document nor RFC 2821 would have been possible without
contributions of course include the original specification of SMTP in
RFC 821.  A considerable quantity of text from RFC 821 still appears
in this document as do several of Jon's original examples that have
been updated only as needed to reflect other changes in the
Many people made comments or suggestions on the mailing list or in
notes to the author.  Important corrections or clarifications were
suggested by several people, including Matti Aarnio, Glenn Anderson,
Derek J. Balling, Alex van den Bogaerdt, Stephane Bortzmeyer, Vint
Cerf, Jutta Degener, Steve Dorner, Lisa Dusseault, Frank Ellerman,
Ned Freed, Randy Gellens, Sabahattin Gucukoglu, Philip Guenther, Arnt
Gulbrandsen, Eric Hall, Richard O. Hammer, Tony Hansen, Peter J.
Holzer, Kari Hurtta, Bryon Roche Kain, Valdis Kletnieks, Mathias
Koerber, John Leslie, Bruce Lilly, Jeff Macdonald, Mark E. Mallett,
Mark Martinec, S. Moonesamy, Lyndon Nerenberg, Chris Newman, Douglas
Otis, Pete Resnick, Robert A. Rosenberg, Vince Sabio, Hector Santos,
David F. Skoll, Paul Smith, and Brett Watson.
The efforts of the Area Directors -- Lisa Dusseault, Ted Hardie, and
Chris Newman -- to get this effort restarted and keep it moving, and
of an ad hoc committee with the same purpose, are gratefully
acknowledged.  The members of that committee were (in alphabetical
order) Dave Crocker, Cyrus Daboo, Tony Finch, Ned Freed, Randall
Gellens, Tony Hansen, the author, and Alexey Melnikov.  Tony Hansen
also acted as ad hoc chair on the mailing list reviewing this
document; without his efforts, sense of balance and fairness, and
patience, it clearly would not have been possible.
[2]   Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - implementation and
[5]   Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
[6]   American National Standards Institute (formerly United States
of America Standards Institute), "USA Code for Information
ANSI X3.4-1968 has been replaced by newer versions with slight
modifications, but the 1968 version remains definitive for the
[7]   Crocker, D. and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax
[8]   Hinden, R. and S. Deering, "IP Version 6 Addressing
[9]   Newman, C., "ESMTP and LMTP Transmission Types Registration",
[10]  Klensin, J., Freed, N., and K. Moore, "SMTP Service Extension
[11]  Klyne, G., Nottingham, M., and J. Mogul, "Registration
Procedures for Message Header Fields", BCP 90, RFC 3864,
[12]  Partridge, C., "Mail routing and the domain system", RFC 974,
[14]  Klensin, J., "Simple Mail Transfer Protocol", RFC 2821,
Reynolds, "Post Office Protocol: Version 2", RFC 937,
[16]  Myers, J. and M. Rose, "Post Office Protocol - Version 3",
[17]  Crispin, M., "INTERNET MESSAGE ACCESS PROTOCOL - VERSION
[18]  Gellens, R. and J. Klensin, "Message Submission for Mail",
[19]  Freed, N., "SMTP Service Extension for Command Pipelining",
[20]  Vaudreuil, G., "SMTP Service Extensions for Transmission of
Large and Binary MIME Messages", RFC 3030, December 2000.
[21]  Freed, N. and N. Borenstein, "Multipurpose Internet Mail
Crocker, "SMTP Service Extension for 8bit-MIMEtransport",
[23]  Moore, K., "MIME (Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions) Part
[24]  Freed, N. and K. Moore, "MIME Parameter Value and Encoded Word
Extensions: Character Sets, Languages, and Continuations",
[25]  Vaudreuil, G., "Enhanced Mail System Status Codes", RFC 3463,
[26]  Hansen, T. and J. Klensin, "A Registry for SMTP Enhanced Mail
[27]  Freed, N., "Behavior of and Requirements for Internet
[28]  Crocker, D., "Standard for the format of ARPA Internet text
[29]  Wong, M. and W. Schlitt, "Sender Policy Framework (SPF) for
Authorizing Use of Domains in E-Mail, Version 1", RFC 4408,
[30]  Fenton, J., "Analysis of Threats Motivating DomainKeys
M. Thomas, "DomainKeys Identified Mail (DKIM) Signatures",
[32]  Moore, K., "Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP) Service
Extension for Delivery Status Notifications (DSNs)", RFC 3461,
[33]  Moore, K. and G. Vaudreuil, "An Extensible Message Format for
Delivery Status Notifications", RFC 3464, January 2003.
[35]  Kille, S., "MIXER (Mime Internet X.400 Enhanced Relay): Mapping
[36]  De Winter, J., "SMTP Service Extension for Remote Message Queue
[37]  Hansen, T. and G. Vaudreuil, "Message Disposition
[38]  Elz, R. and R. Bush, "Clarifications to the DNS Specification",
[39]  Nakamura, M. and J. Hagino, "SMTP Operational Experience in
[40]  Partridge, C., "Duplicate messages and SMTP", RFC 1047,
[41]  Crispin, M., "Interactive Mail Access Protocol: Version 2",
[42]  Lambert, M., "PCMAIL: A distributed mail system for personal
[43]  Galvin, J., Murphy, S., Crocker, S., and N. Freed, "Security
Multiparts for MIME: Multipart/Signed and Multipart/Encrypted",
Thayer, "OpenPGP Message Format", RFC 4880, November 2007.
[45]  Ramsdell, B., "Secure/Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions
(S/MIME) Version 3.1 Message Specification", RFC 3851,
[46]  Internet Assigned Number Authority (IANA), "IANA Mail
<http://www.iana.org/assignments/mail-parameters>.
[47]  Internet Assigned Number Authority (IANA), "Address Literal
<http://www.iana.org/assignments/address-literal-tags>.
Appendix A.  TCP Transport Service
The TCP connection supports the transmission of 8-bit bytes.  The
SMTP data is 7-bit ASCII characters.  Each character is transmitted
as an 8-bit byte with the high-order bit cleared to zero.  Service
extensions may modify this rule to permit transmission of full 8-bit
data bytes as part of the message body, or, if specifically designed
to do so, in SMTP commands or responses.
Appendix B.  Generating SMTP Commands from RFC 822 Header Fields
Some systems use an RFC 822 header section (only) in a mail
submission protocol, or otherwise generate SMTP commands from RFC 822
header fields when such a message is handed to an MTA from a UA.
While the MTA-UA protocol is a private matter, not covered by any
Internet Standard, there are problems with this approach.  For
example, there have been repeated problems with proper handling of
"bcc" copies and redistribution lists when information that
conceptually belongs to the mail envelope is not separated early in
processing from header field information (and kept separate).
It is recommended that the UA provide its initial ("submission
client") MTA with an envelope separate from the message itself.
However, if the envelope is not supplied, SMTP commands SHOULD be
be copied to a RCPT command (generating multiple message copies
if that is required for queuing or delivery).  This includes any
addresses listed in a RFC 822 "group".  Any BCC header fields
SHOULD then be removed from the header section.  Once this
process is completed, the remaining header fields SHOULD be
checked to verify that at least one TO, CC, or BCC header field
remains.  If none do, then a BCC header field with no additional
information SHOULD be inserted as specified in [4].
derived from the system's identity for the submitting (local)
user, and the "From:" header field otherwise.  If there is a
system identity available, it SHOULD also be copied to the Sender
header field if it is different from the address in the From
header field.  (Any Sender header field that was already there
SHOULD be removed.)  Systems may provide a way for submitters to
override the envelope return address, but may want to restrict
its use to privileged users.  This will not prevent mail forgery,
but may lessen its incidence; see Section 7.1.
When an MTA is being used in this way, it bears responsibility for
ensuring that the message being transmitted is valid.  The mechanisms
for checking that validity, and for handling (or returning) messages
that are not valid at the time of arrival, are part of the MUA-MTA
interface and not covered by this specification.
A submission protocol based on Standard RFC 822 information alone
MUST NOT be used to gateway a message from a foreign (non-SMTP) mail
system into an SMTP environment.  Additional information to construct
an envelope must come from some source in the other environment,
whether supplemental header fields or the foreign system's envelope.
Attempts to gateway messages using only their header "To" and "Cc"
fields have repeatedly caused mail loops and other behavior adverse
to the proper functioning of the Internet mail environment.  These
problems have been especially common when the message originates from
an Internet mailing list and is distributed into the foreign
environment using envelope information.  When these messages are then
processed by a header-section-only remailer, loops back to the
Internet environment (and the mailing list) are almost inevitable.
Appendix C.  Source Routes
Historically, the <reverse-path> was a reverse source routing list of
hosts and a source mailbox.  The first host in the <reverse-path> was
historically the host sending the MAIL command; today, source routes
SHOULD NOT appear in the reverse-path.  Similarly, the <forward-path>
may be a source routing lists of hosts and a destination mailbox.
However, in general, the <forward-path> SHOULD contain only a mailbox
and domain name, relying on the domain name system to supply routing
information if required.  The use of source routes is deprecated (see
Appendix F.2); while servers MUST be prepared to receive and handle
them as discussed in Section 3.3 and Appendix F.2, clients SHOULD NOT
transmit them and this section is included in the current
specification only to provide context.  It has been modified somewhat
from the material in RFC 821 to prevent server actions that might
confuse clients or subsequent servers that do not expect a full
source route implementation.
For relay purposes, the forward-path may be a source route of the
form "@ONE,@TWO:JOE@THREE", where ONE, TWO, and THREE MUST be fully-
qualified domain names.  This form is used to emphasize the
distinction between an address and a route.  The mailbox (here, JOE@
THREE) is an absolute address, and the route is information about how
to get there.  The two concepts should not be confused.
If source routes are used, RFC 821 and the text below should be
consulted for the mechanisms for constructing and updating the
forward-path.  A server that is reached by means of a source route
(e.g., its domain name appears first in the list in the forward-path)
MUST remove its domain name from any forward-paths in which that
domain name appears before forwarding the message and MAY remove all
other source routing information.  The reverse-path SHOULD NOT be
updated by servers conforming to this specification.
Notice that the forward-path and reverse-path appear in the SMTP
commands and replies, but not necessarily in the message.  That is,
there is no need for these paths and especially this syntax to appear
in the "To:" , "From:", "CC:", etc. fields of the message header
section.  Conversely, SMTP servers MUST NOT derive final message
routing information from message header fields.
When the list of hosts is present despite the recommendations above,
it is a "reverse" source route and indicates that the mail was
relayed through each host on the list (the first host in the list was
the most recent relay).  This list is used as a source route to
return non-delivery notices to the sender.  If, contrary to the
recommendations here, a relay host adds itself to the beginning of
the list, it MUST use its name as known in the transport environment
to which it is relaying the mail rather than that of the transport
environment from which the mail came (if they are different).  Note
that a situation could easily arise in which some relay hosts add
their names to the reverse source route and others do not, generating
discontinuities in the routing list.  This is another reason why
servers needing to return a message SHOULD ignore the source route
entirely and simply use the domain as specified in the Mailbox.
This section presents complete scenarios of several types of SMTP
sessions.  In the examples, "C:" indicates what is said by the SMTP
client, and "S:" indicates what is said by the SMTP server.
D.1.  A Typical SMTP Transaction Scenario
This SMTP example shows mail sent by Smith at host bar.com, and to
Jones, Green, and Brown at host foo.com.  Here we assume that host
bar.com contacts host foo.com directly.  The mail is accepted for
Jones and Brown.  Green does not have a mailbox at host foo.com.
S: 220 foo.com Simple Mail Transfer Service Ready
C: MAIL FROM:<Smith@bar.com>
S: 354 Start mail input; end with <CRLF>.<CRLF>
S: 221 foo.com Service closing transmission channel
D.2.  Aborted SMTP Transaction Scenario
D.3.  Relayed Mail Scenario
Step 1 -- Source Host to Relay Host
The source host performs a DNS lookup on XYZ.COM (the destination
address) and finds DNS MX records specifying xyz.com as the best
preference and foo.com as a lower preference.  It attempts to open a
connection to xyz.com and fails.  It then opens a connection to
foo.com, with the following dialogue:
C: From: John Q. Public <JQP@bar.com>
C: Subject: The Next Meeting of the Board
C: The next meeting of the board of directors will be
Step 2 -- Relay Host to Destination Host
foo.com, having received the message, now does a DNS lookup on
xyz.com.  It finds the same set of MX records, but cannot use the one
that points to itself (or to any other host as a worse preference).
It tries to open a connection to xyz.com itself and succeeds.  Then
S: 220 xyz.com Simple Mail Transfer Service Ready
C: Subject:  The Next Meeting of the Board
D.4.  Verifying and Sending Scenario
S: 250 Mark Crispin <Admin.MRC@foo.com>
C: RCPT TO:<Admin.MRC@foo.com>
Appendix E.  Other Gateway Issues
In general, gateways between the Internet and other mail systems
SHOULD attempt to preserve any layering semantics across the
boundaries between the two mail systems involved.  Gateway-
translation approaches that attempt to take shortcuts by mapping
(such as mapping envelope information from one system to the message
header section or body of another) have generally proven to be
inadequate in important ways.  Systems translating between
environments that do not support both envelopes and a header section
and Internet mail must be written with the understanding that some
information loss is almost inevitable.
Appendix F.  Deprecated Features of RFC 821
A few features of RFC 821 have proven to be problematic and SHOULD
NOT be used in Internet mail.
This command, described in RFC 821, raises important security issues
since, in the absence of strong authentication of the host requesting
that the client and server switch roles, it can easily be used to
divert mail from its correct destination.  Its use is deprecated;
SMTP systems SHOULD NOT use it unless the server can authenticate the
RFC 821 utilized the concept of explicit source routing to get mail
from one host to another via a series of relays.  The requirement to
utilize source routes in regular mail traffic was eliminated by the
introduction of the domain name system "MX" record and the last
significant justification for them was eliminated by the
introduction, in RFC 1123, of a clear requirement that addresses
following an "@" must all be fully-qualified domain names.
Consequently, the only remaining justifications for the use of source
routes are support for very old SMTP clients or MUAs and in mail
system debugging.  They can, however, still be useful in the latter
circumstance and for routing mail around serious, but temporary,
problems such as problems with the relevant DNS records.
SMTP servers MUST continue to accept source route syntax as specified
in the main body of this document and in RFC 1123.  They MAY, if
necessary, ignore the routes and utilize only the target domain in
the address.  If they do utilize the source route, the message MUST
be sent to the first domain shown in the address.  In particular, a
server MUST NOT guess at shortcuts within the source route.
Clients SHOULD NOT utilize explicit source routing except under
unusual circumstances, such as debugging or potentially relaying
around firewall or mail system configuration errors.
As discussed in Sections 3.1 and 4.1.1, EHLO SHOULD be used rather
than HELO when the server will accept the former.  Servers MUST
continue to accept and process HELO in order to support older
RFC 821 provided for specifying an Internet address as a decimal
integer host number prefixed by a pound sign, "#".  In practice, that
form has been obsolete since the introduction of TCP/IP.  It is
deprecated and MUST NOT be used.
When dates are inserted into messages by SMTP clients or servers
(e.g., in trace header fields), four-digit years MUST BE used.  Two-
digit years are deprecated; three-digit years were never permitted in
the Internet mail system.
F.6.  Sending versus Mailing
In addition to specifying a mechanism for delivering messages to
user's mailboxes, RFC 821 provided additional, optional, commands to
deliver messages directly to the user's terminal screen.  These
commands (SEND, SAML, SOML) were rarely implemented, and changes in
workstation technology and the introduction of other protocols may
have rendered them obsolete even where they are implemented.
Clients SHOULD NOT provide SEND, SAML, or SOML as services.  Servers
MAY implement them.  If they are implemented by servers, the
implementation model specified in RFC 821 MUST be used and the
command names MUST be published in the response to the EHLO command.
Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).
OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
